--- Start of content from file: Gary Thomas - The Sacred Search_ What If It’s Not about Who You Marry, But Why_-David C. Cook (2013).pdf ---
To two very special people: my oldest
brother, Jerry Thomas, who has been a rock
in our family and a great encouragement and
inspiration to me for my entire life, and to his
delightful daughter (and my goddaughter),
Lindsey Thomas, that she will embrace the
godly example her parents have set for her
and enjoy the riches of a truly sacred
marriage.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I’d like to thank those who read previous versions of this
book and offered many helpful comments: Lisa Thomas,
Darrell and Allison Vesterfelt, Steve and Rebecca Wilke,
Mary Kay Smith, John Card, Steve and Candice Watters,
Lindsey Thomas, and Jay Fields. A special thanks is also
due to Dr. Ed Young and our home church, Second Baptist
in Houston, Texas, for the support base they provide.
I am also very grateful to my agent, Curtis Yates of
Yates and Yates, for his friendship and partnership for so
many years; and to the David C Cook team: especially Alex
Field, Dan Rich, Don Pape, Mike Salisbury, Ginia Croker,
Karen Lee-Thorp, Caitlyn Carlson, Mike Worley, Michael
Covington, Ingrid Beck, and the many other fine individuals
who have worked to make this book a success. It’s an
honor to be part of your team.

CONTENTS
COVER
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
1. A TALE OF TWO TEARS
2. THE GREAT EXCEPTION
3. VULNERABLE AND STUPID
4. YOU DON’T WANT WHAT YOU THINK YOU WANT
5. SOUL MATE OR SOLE MATE?
6. A MATCH MADE IN HEAVEN? ISAAC AND REBEKAH 7. THE
RELIGIOUS ROMANCE LOTTERY
8. PASSIVE SURRENDER OR PASSIONATE PURSUIT? COMPELLING
REASONS TO GET MARRIED 9. WHAT’S YOUR STYLE?
10. ARE YOU STRONG ENOUGH TO BE MY (WO)MAN?
11. MAKING A MARRIAGE
12. SOMETHING YOU MUST AGREE ABOUT
13. YOU’RE LOOKING FOR A COMPLEMENT, NOT A CLONE
14. WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW REALLY CAN HURT YOU
15. A NEUROCHEMICAL WAR AGAINST YOUR REASONING
16. PROBLEM PEOPLE
17. WHY YOU WON’T KNOW YOUR WIFE UNTIL SHE TURNS THIRTY-
FIVE
18. WHAT ABOUT YOU? HOW WOULD JESUS DATE?
19. MERCY MARRIAGES

EPILOGUE: A NEW VISION
AUTHOR INFORMATION
EXTRAS

1
A TALE OF TWO TEARS
The faithful pastor’s face grew taut as he told me, “Let me
be honest with you. My marriage has constituted the
biggest cross of my life.”
The tears that slipped out of his eyes and rolled down
his cheeks provided a sobering picture of the weight this
man carries with him every day of his life. Instead of
launching him into newer and bigger opportunities, instead
of providing encouragement and sustenance and hope, his
marriage is acting like dead weight. God continues to use
him, but he walks his journey with a rock in his shoe that
hurts him every step of the way.
A thirtysomething woman looked into my eyes and let
tears of another sort flow freely as she spoke of her
husband’s care for her. She’s had some health-related
issues to contend with, and life has not been easy, but her
husband has been another kind of rock, a source of
tremendous encouragement and acceptance: “Next to
Jesus, my husband has been the greatest joy in my life. I
can’t even imagine where I’d be without him or how I

would have faced all that I have without him by my side.”
Both of these scenarios are true. I’m sorry that they
may reinforce gender stereotypes—the male leader and
the woman needing support. Because they are based in
fact I can’t, with integrity, change them. Look past that for
a moment to see the real-life frustration and joy,
respectively, that each person feels. One person is crying
tears of pain, working as hard as he can to keep his
marriage together, but his relationship is compared to a
cross. It saps his strength, but he perseveres, because he
knows it’s the right thing to do.
The other person is also crying, but not because she is
struggling through a difficult relationship. She weeps
because she is grateful for a man who loves her so well,
so wonderfully, that she can’t imagine life without him.
Tears of pain and tears of joy.
A marriage compared to bearing the cross.
A union compared to a foretaste of heaven.
Ten years after you’re married, what kind of tears will
you be crying? Will they be the stinging tears of pain or
warm tears generated by joy? The reality is, every
marriage has plenty of both kinds of tears, but it’s also
true that some marriages are marked primarily by pain

while others are marked primarily by joy. No marriage is
easy, but some marriages build each partner up, while
others tear each partner down. Every marriage takes time
and effort, but some marriages sap the spouses’ strength,
while others generate joy and enthusiasm and intimacy.
I’m writing this book because I want you to cry tears of
joy on your tenth anniversary. I want you to be able to
say, with all sincerity, “Next to becoming a Christian,
marrying _______ is the best decision I’ve ever made.”
But here’s the thing that might shock you: the answer
to this question may well be driven more by why you get
married than by who you marry. It’s not that the “who”
doesn’t matter (in fact, it matters very much); it’s just that
asking and settling the “why” question first will set you up
to make a wise choice about the “who.” Why do you want
to get married? That’s what you need to ask before you
decide who to marry.
It’s a particularly important question because if you
make one bad financial investment, you can always start
over, but biblical marriage is a one-shot deal. Many
Christians believe there are a couple of biblically
“accepted” causes for divorce, but these are limited and
severe. In the vast majority of cases, should you become

disappointed in your choice, your obligation as a believer
will be to work it out instead of walking out and starting
over. This fact alone makes it doubly worth the time,
effort, and even the heartache of a breakup for believers
to make sure they’re making a wise decision before they
enter into marriage. Once you get married, every evening,
every weekend, every holiday, every morning will be
marked, for good or for ill, by that relationship.
The person you marry is the last person you’ll see
every night before you go to sleep. Their face is the first
one you will see when you wake up in the morning. Their
words will encourage or discourage you, their humor will
make you laugh in amusement or cry in shame. Their body
will pleasure you or threaten you. Their hands will hold
you or hurt you. Their presence will be a healing balm or a
reminder of all that could have been.
Many years ago, when speaking at an event in
California, I slipped out of a hotel ballroom in order to pick
up an extra shirt at an outside mall (poor packing).
Surrounded by beautiful people in a beautiful setting, I
longed more than I can describe to see my wife walking
toward me. I had a fantasy about my wife, but there was
nothing sexual about it. I just wanted to see her walking

out of that mass of people and smiling in my direction, to
know she would spend the rest of the weekend with me. It
was an impossible fantasy—Lisa was a thousand miles
away, just north of Seattle, caring for our children, but
there wasn’t a sight in the world that would have given me
more joy that day than to see Lisa—my wife—walking
toward me.
I want you to have moments like that—where, even
when you’re apart, you wish you could be together. I don’t
want you to be like so many couples I talk to whose
fantasy is watching their spouses walk away.
It changes you as a person when a woman who calls
you her pastor is crying on the phone because she’s
worried that your work with her husband will cause him to
stay. She’s exhausted by her marriage, disappointed to the
extreme, ready for it to be over with—but she wants to
honor God, so she and her husband meet with you. She
then listens to you talk and thinks God might actually use
you to convince her husband to fully repent and change his
ways, and that’s what causes her to break down. She and
her husband had a good nine months of dating, but there
hasn’t been a good nine-month stretch in their entire ten-
year marriage, and his divorcing her would feel like

liberation.
I don’t want that for you. I don’t want you ever to be at
a point where you think your happiness as a spouse
depends upon my failure as a pastor to convince your
spouse to stay. But, friends, that’s real life for a lot of
couples. They rushed the process or made the decision for
poor reasons and now are fighting the consequences
every day of their lives.
LIFE-GIVING LOVE
So let’s briefly introduce the “why” of marriage to set you
up to make a wise choice about the “who.” A home
established on Matthew 6:33—“Seek first the kingdom of
God and His righteousness, and all these things shall be
added to you” (NKJV)—is a glorious thing. While this verse
contains a command, it’s also an exciting promise of a rich
and meaningful life. When husband and wife are
committed in Christ, growing together in the Lord,
supporting each other in their spiritual walks, raising
children in the fear of the Lord, loving each other out of
reverence for God, joy abounds and miracles happen.
Selfish people become servants. Self-centered children
grow up to become workers in God’s kingdom. Strangers

become intimate friends. Daily life is filled with the drama
of kingdom building. There are plenty of mistakes, lots of
repenting, times of frustration, sickness, and even doubts.
But in the end, God’s presence prevails, people are
transformed, kingdom work is accomplished, and trials are
overcome. If two people join themselves around this
mission—if they make their marital choice based on the
best person with whom they can accomplish this mission—
they are far more likely to have a fulfilling and soul-
building marriage.
On the other hand, I’ve witnessed how miserable
people can make each other when they live for
themselves. Though their initial sexual attraction might
have been off the charts, it is usually only a matter of
months until they are saying and doing awful, awful things
to each other, so awful that they will call a pastor on the
phone, someone they don’t even know, because they are
so desperate to find another way to live. There was a time
when they couldn’t live without each other; every second,
they had to be together. They couldn’t keep their hands off
each other. Now they can’t bear to live together. When
they’re in the same room, or in the same car, or on the
same telephone call, they can’t stop fighting.

It’s made me realize that the old cliché is all too true: a
good marriage is the closest two people will ever come to
heaven this side of eternity; a bad marriage is the closest
two people in an affluent society will ever come to hell.
Such problems usually erupt from trying to build a life
together without purpose, without mission, without
something that not only establishes a connection but keeps
you caring about each other for the next fifty to sixty
years.
Can I be honest with you? There isn’t a person alive
who can keep you enthralled for the next five or six
decades. If they’re really funny, really attractive, and
you’re really infatuated, you can be enthralled for a few
years, but selfish people—even wealthy selfish people, or
beautiful selfish people, or famous selfish people—
eventually get bored with each other, and the very
relationship that once gave them security and life feels like
prison and death. No matter how intensely you feel in love
now, the same thing will happen to you if you get married
without a shared mission.
I want you to have a spiritually enriching marriage, a
marriage that spawns life, vibrancy, intimacy, a lifetime of
memories with your best friend, and the overwhelming joy

of creating a family together. Family life is such a good
life, and intimate marriage is such an amazing gift. The
friendship that results from facing all seasons of life
together, praying together, raising kids together, serving
the Lord together, having fun, having sex, suffering
heartaches and heartbreaks, overcoming setbacks and
learning to deal with disappointments, growing together
through all of them, creates a bond that no initial sexual
attraction or romantic infatuation could ever hope to
match.
The reward for making a wise marital choice is so
tremendous that I don’t want you to miss it. The
consequences of making a foolish choice can be so painful
and lasting that I don’t want you to have to endure them.
I cannot overstate how crucial it is to be cautious and
discerning in making such an important decision. You don’t
want to miss out, do you? This is not a time for
romanticized foolishness. If you remain rooted in Christ,
fully engage your mind, and draw on all your resources—
God’s guidance, Scripture, your family, your church, your
sensible friends—and approach this decision with all
intention, purpose, and wisdom, you are far more likely to
enter a rich, satisfying, and soul-building marriage.

Ask yourself: “Ten years from now, what kind of tears
do I want to be crying? Tears of joy, or tears of pain? Do I
want to be in a marriage that lifts me up, or one that
drags me down? A union marked by a shared partnership,
or one where we’re hiding from and hurting each other on
a regular basis?”
Stick with me, and I’ll do everything I can to help you
cry tears of joy.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Describe a marriage you respect: what is it about the
couple that makes you admire their relationship?
2. Ten years after you’re married, how do you hope
someone will describe your marriage relationship? Write
out the “ideal” description of the relationship you hope to
have.
3. Describe some of the marriages you’ve seen that you
definitely do not want to model your own marriage on.
What attributes of those relationships do you hope to
avoid?
4. Have you ever asked yourself the question, “Why do I
want to get married?” Why do you want to get married?
5. How do you think getting married with the intention of

“seeking first the kingdom of God” will change the way you
pursue someone to marry, as well as the type of person
you might consider?

2
THE GREAT EXCEPTION
Can you help me out here? There must be a version of the
Bible out there I haven’t read yet, one that has a
mysterious exception clause.
I thought I had the bases covered in my research. I’ve
checked out the King James, the English Standard Version,
the New King James, the New International Version (both
the 1984 and the 2011 editions), the Message, the New
Living Translation, the New American Standard, and many
others. None of them—not one—contains the exception
clause I’m looking for, so if you find it, will you please
email me and let me know which version has it? Because
apparently it’s the version many singles read.
The exception clause I’m referring to is found in
Matthew 6:33. Here’s how it reads in the New King James
Version: “Seek first the kingdom of God and His
righteousness, and all these things shall be added to you.”
The mysterious version I’m looking for, the one I see so
many people following and memorizing, goes something
like this: “Seek first the kingdom of God and His

righteousness, except when you’re choosing someone to
marry. In that case, you should follow your emotions,
insist on a thrilling romantic attraction and overall
relational compatibility that makes the relationship fun,
and then all these things will be added unto you.”
Let me ask you: do you trust Jesus? Do you believe that
He truly has your best interests at heart, that He would
never mislead you—that if you follow His advice, you’re
setting yourself up for the best, most meaningful, and
most fulfilling life imaginable? Can you count on Him
knowing what He’s talking about? Do you think it’s possible
that the second most important decision you’ll ever make
—who you marry—should be based on Jesus’s
fundamental agenda for our lives: seeking first God’s
kingdom and righteousness? Do you believe every
significant decision we make should be run through this
grid? If our choice of marital partner is an exception, what
wouldn’t qualify as an exception? If Jesus’s words aren’t
relevant for such a crucial decision, why would they have
any importance in any lesser decision?
I want to make a promise to you: if you will seek first
God’s kingdom and His righteousness and let that agenda
drive your decision regarding whom you choose to marry

and refuse to compromise on that, you will set yourself up
for a much more fulfilling, spiritually enriching, and overall
more satisfying marriage. The degree to which you
compromise on this verse is the degree to which you put
your future satisfaction in jeopardy and open wide the
door to great frustration and even regret.
WHY WE MARRY
If you’re under thirty years old, your generation is the first
generation in about a hundred years not to assume that
you need to call the phone company when you move into a
new apartment or house. In my day, that was one of the
first things we did—at college, and then afterward. We
“hooked up the phones” so that people could get in touch
with us.
Cell phones have demolished that assumption. Most
people under thirty don’t even have what used to be
referred to as “land lines.” If someone wants to reach you,
they have your cell phone; why pay for a line inside your
house?
And yet every month, millions of older people who own
cell phones still pay thirty to forty dollars to maintain a
home phone line, just because they always have.

You can laugh at your parents for not getting how the
world has moved on, but there are a few things singles
are susceptible to, things you take for granted, that just
aren’t true either. Even so, you keep on doing them,
because everyone you know blindly accepts certain
assumptions—such as the belief that you should seek
romantic excitement and sexual chemistry above
everything else when it comes to choosing someone to
marry.
Our culture is still stuck on viewing marriage through
the lens of happiness first and foremost—defining
happiness by romantic intensity and sexual chemistry.
Since the 1960s, sociologists have found a steady
progression of young American men and women who
demand more and more of love—yet we’re getting less
and less out of our marriages. In 1967, a study of college-
age women found that 76 percent of women said they
would marry someone if the man had every trait they
were looking for, even if they didn’t feel “romantic love”
toward them. In more recent research, 91 percent of
women said “absolutely not.”1 That’s a huge shift. People
have been pursuing such pairings for several generations
now, and I’m asking you to be an astute and honest

observer: how’s that working out for us?
For starters: how many marriages do you see that are
truly happy? I’m not talking about marriages that are less
than three years old. Tell me—how many people do you
know who have been married ten years or longer whose
marriage you envy or even admire?
Notice the trend: most people marry on the basis of
perceived happiness, but few remain very happy for very
long. And yet, every year, hundreds of thousands of
couples think they can be different, so they base their
decision on the same premise: we “feel” something
special, we seem to be happy together, we’re generally
compatible, so let’s get married.
How many failed marriages will it take for us to see
that this approach just isn’t working? Make this personal:
why do you think it will be any different for you than it has
been for the millions of other couples who have already
tried this approach?
Are you willing to even consider that the Hollywood
version of “falling in love” might just possibly be leading
people astray? That, as powerful as romance is, it might
not be the best reason to get married?
Here’s just one quick example of how sexual chemistry,

apart from any other consideration, can lead us astray.
Psychologically, women are more likely to experience
romantic love with dominant men, even though dominant
men typically demonstrate less ability to express the kind
of companionship, relational skills, and emotional
attachment that women ultimately desire in a lifelong
mate. In other words, women, if you simply follow your
feelings, you are more likely to fall in love with a guy who
will thrill you for twelve to eighteen months as a boyfriend
and then frustrate you for five to six decades as a
husband.
Guys, on the other hand, are more inclined to
experience romantic love with women they are attracted
to physically, yet physical appearance is the thing most
likely to change in a person’s life. Marriage isn’t about
being young together; it’s about growing old together—
and bodies change as we get older. If you don’t marry
with that in mind, you’re going to make a major mistake—
perhaps the biggest mistake of your life.
What draws most of us into marriage is rarely the
ingredient that serves long-term happiness in marriage.
Understanding this alone will help you make a wiser
choice.

MAYBE BEING IN LOVE ISN’T ENOUGH
I had a sobering conversation with a woman my age.
She’s been divorced twice. She was getting serious with
another guy, but things had gotten rocky and hurtful. It
was so bad, her boyfriend made her cry a couple of times
a week. He could be forceful, say mean things, and though
he wasn’t physically violent, he could scare her. There
were, of course, several positive aspects about the
relationship. He could be thoughtful, supportive,
occasionally even poetic, but the negative things were,
interestingly enough, the very same issues that had led to
the breakup of her first two marriages, so you might think
they’d be red flags for her. Why would she want to enter
into another relationship that would make her miserable?
To make matters worse, she wasn’t sure she could trust
him—in fact, she’d overheard him telling another woman
on the phone that he still loved her. On its own, this
seemed quite a devastating analysis, but here’s the thing:
she was still in the relationship.
I asked what seemed like some obvious questions:
“Why are you still with him? What’s in this for you? Why do
you put up with this?”
Her response was immediate: “Because I’m in love with

him. I genuinely and deeply love him.”
I paused to set my tone on “as gentle as possible.” This
was a minefield, but I was afraid that if I didn’t address
the situation, this woman could make yet another serious
mistake after already experiencing two blown marriages.
“Were you in love with your first husband?” I asked.
“Definitely. I was devastated when he cheated on me
and then left me.”
“And what about your second husband?”
“Yes. It was different, I think, because he fed some ego
needs, but of course, I was in love with him.”
“And yet both marriages failed.”
“That’s right.”
I took a deep breath and tried be as gentle as I could
be when I said, “Maybe feeling like you’re in love with
someone isn’t enough of a reason for you to get married.
Maybe you need to set the bar higher, find something
more.”
You won’t hear a character’s friend say this in a
romantic comedy. Taylor Swift won’t sing this, Eminem
won’t rap it, and Suzanne Collins won’t write it, but it’s
true: just because you’re “in love” with someone doesn’t
mean you should seriously consider marrying them. The

next chapter will explain why I believe this is true, but for
now I’m just throwing it out there and asking you to at
least consider that romantic attraction, as wonderful and
as emotionally intoxicating as it can be, can actually lead
you astray as much as it can help you. I’m not talking it
down; “connecting” with someone on that level is a
wonderful thing. Enjoy it, revel in it, even write a song
about it if you want, but don’t bet your life on it.
I’ve seen infatuation lead far more people astray than
into satisfying marriages. I’ve seen people fail to pursue a
relationship, even though they respected, admired, and
loved another person, because there didn’t seem to be
that over-the-top, make-my-knees-weak sexual chemistry.
And I’ve watched people rush into a relationship that any
objective observer could see had some serious problems
on the horizon, but the feelings were so intense, it all felt
so right, that two people were willing to bet their lives and
their future kids’ happiness on it.
I believe both Scripture and science testify that making
a lifetime decision about who to marry primarily on the
basis of romantic attraction is a very foolish thing to do.
STUDY QUESTIONS

1. If you personally know anyone who has gotten married
recently, discuss why you think they got married. Were
their decisions based on good reasons? What can you
learn from watching others?
2. Do you agree with Gary that Matthew 6:33 should drive
your pursuit of a marriage partner? Why or why not?
3. What would make you consider someone as a potential
marriage partner? What would definitely disqualify a
person in your mind?
4. What was your reaction to Gary’s statement, “Just
because you’re ‘in love’ with someone doesn’t mean you
should seriously consider marrying them”?
5. How can you and your friends question your
assumptions about why you should or shouldn’t be
interested in someone as “marriage material”? What
assumptions do you need to question? What will it take to
do that?
NOTE
1 Debra Lieberman and Elaine Hatfield, “Passionate Love: Cross-Cultural
and Evolutionary Perspectives,” in The New Psychology of Love, ed.
Robert Sternberg and Karin Weis (New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press, 2006), 280.

3
VULNERABLE AND STUPID
The way God made our brains, infatuation resembles an
hourglass. The moment you become smitten by someone
—the second you find yourself deeply “in love”—is the
moment that hourglass gets turned over.
There is enough sand in that hourglass, on average, to
last you about twelve to eighteen months. On occasion,
the sand may trickle down a bit beyond that, up to about
two years, but never by much and not with the same
intensity. The average life span of an infatuation is almost
always less than two years. Yeah, sexual chemistry and
romantic attraction can remain. Certainly, during times of
trauma or intimate connection, those romantic feelings will
be revived, but they cease to be the main glue that holds a
relationship together on a day-to-day basis. Feelings
become “warm and dependable” more than “hot and
excitable.” God simply did not design our brains to sustain
a lifelong infatuation (for some very good reasons).
How do you know if you’re in an infatuation? Here are
the neurological markers according to Dr. Helen Fisher, a

preeminent biological anthropologist who has written on
the topic:
• The lover focuses on the beloved’s better
traits and overlooks or minimizes flaws.
• Infatuated people exhibit extreme energy,
hyperactivity, sleeplessness, impulsivity,
euphoria, and mood swings.
• One or both of the partners develops a goal-
oriented fixation on winning the beloved.
• Relational passion is heightened, not
weakened, by adversity; the more the
relationship is attacked, the more the passion
grows.
• The lovers become emotionally dependent
on the relationship.
• Partners reorder their daily priorities to
remain in contact as much as humanly
possible, and they even experience separation
anxiety when apart.
• Empathy is so powerful that many report
they would “die for their beloved.”
• An infatuated person thinks about their lover

to an obsessive degree.
• Sexual desire is intense, and the
relationship becomes marked by extreme
possessiveness.1
The way many researchers describe this brain state
overall is an “idealization” of the one you love. You focus
on strengths (many of which might be imaginary) and are
blind to weaknesses (many of which are readily apparent
to outside observers). You “idealize” this person to make
them the kind of person you want them to be. It should be
clear that in this state you’re in no position to make an
objective choice if you rely only on your feelings.
Here’s what you’re dealing with: “Romantic love is
involuntary, difficult to control, and impermanent.”2 That’s
the psychological view, but let me say that as Christians,
though the initial onslaught of feelings is involuntary, what
we do with those feelings, how we control our thoughts,
and the level of our obsessiveness is our responsibility. We
may not be able to choose the initial onslaught, but we can
choose how we manage it. We can feed it, starve it,
indulge it, or test it.
We are not “evolved mammals” who must play out our

biological destiny. We are image bearers of the Creator
God, who has redeemed us and given us His Holy Spirit to
empower us, correct us, and guide us.
We need to be wise about our human condition but
place our hope in our spiritual redemption. It helps
Christians to know that romantic love can spring on us
unintended and that there is no age limit. You might be
single in your twenties or married in your fifties;
infatuation will take you through roughly the same
emotions and process. Recognizing this, as well as
infatuation’s impermanence, helps us to be forewarned, so
that when it happens we’re not caught unprepared. It’s a
fact of life, but it’s going to pass (at least in its current
form). We all have to learn to deal with it and become
good stewards of our emotional and relational health.
INFATUATED WITH INFATUATION
We live in a culture that is infatuated with infatuation, for
some understandable reasons. Psychologists liken
infatuation to an addiction; indeed, it affects the same
regions of our brains as cocaine or gambling. Just as some
people are more prone to alcoholism than others,
however, some people are more genetically predisposed

to “fall in love” more often and more intensely. This is an
important point to keep in mind if the one you’ve given
your heart to doesn’t seem as “desperately” in love as you
do. Infatuation doesn’t affect everyone in the same way.
Neurologically, a person’s sense of security, self-
esteem, spiritual maturity, and personality all affect how
they fall in love, what that experience feels like, and the
intensity with which they feel those emotions. For
example, an insecure person with low self-esteem is likely
to be clingy and more obsessive about the relationship
than someone who is relatively secure with a high self-
esteem. A woman from a broken home who has a high
fear of abandonment often wants to rush things to “lock
in” the relationship, pushing for an early engagement.
She’s more concerned about avoiding another relational
loss than she is about finding the best possible match.
Two relatively secure individuals can respect and love
each other without experiencing obsessive thinking,
euphoric mood swings, or desperate clinginess. The
absence of these markers doesn’t mean they are less in
love than other couples; it might just mean they are more
grounded as individuals.
While the experience of infatuation is not exactly the

same for any two individuals, when it comes, it is thrilling,
powerful, promising, and even transcendent. I don’t want
to diminish the mystery and poetry of a truly delicious
romantic attachment and “soul connection,” but in reality
you’re living through a fairly predictable and observable
neurochemical reaction. And here’s something you need to
know: the state of infatuation actually impedes your ability
to objectively discern your partner’s faults and
weaknesses. Dr. Thomas Lewis put it this way: “Love may
not be literally blind, but it does seem to be literally
incapable of reason and the levels of appropriate
negativity necessary for realism.”3
One summer I spoke at a church in Pennsylvania, and a
young woman came up to me afterward. She and her
boyfriend were talking about marriage. She asked my
advice, and we discussed her boyfriend’s strengths. I then
asked her about his weaknesses. She blushed a bit and
answered, “You know, that’s what’s so amazing. I don’t
think he has any.”
“Really?”
“I know. I can’t believe it either. I guess I just got
lucky.”
I reminded her of James 3:2, “We all stumble in many

ways,” and said to her, “I’m going to trust the truth of
Scripture—that we all stumble, including your boyfriend—
more than I’ll trust your perception. Since you asked for it,
my advice is this: don’t marry this guy until you can tell me
how he stumbles, because I guarantee you—even more
than that, God’s Word guarantees you—that he does
stumble, and you might as well know what you’re signing
up for before you marry him.”
Here’s the danger of letting these powerful feelings
dictate whether you begin, stay in, or end a relationship:
when the relationship hits a rough spot (as it inevitably
will), most people who have overwhelming feelings will
ignore the issues raised by the conflict and try to make the
relationship work because they have strong feelings.
Wisdom says we should try to make a relationship work
not because we have strong feelings but because it’s a
good match. Far too often, we are more motivated to
preserve the relationship if the feelings are there than if
the match makes sense. In other words, most of us are
motivated more by feelings than by wisdom.
A PREDICTABLE PATTERN
You “fall in love,” and suddenly you have increased

energy; your attention is focused, almost obsessive; you
become possessive and then practically live to make this
person your own. It’s amazing to me how virtually every
other tie in life is considered inferior and less important
than this newfound emotion.
A woman once asked me to pray for her because she
felt like she might “have” to leave the hometown she had
lived in for over twenty-five years—a town where she was
gainfully employed, where she had been a church member
her entire life, where all her friends and family—not to
mention her entire base of support—were.
“Why would you want to leave all this?” I asked.
“I think God may be leading me to,” she replied.
It turned out that the motivation was actually a guy, not
a God, and one who lived fifteen hundred miles away.
“He must be some guy,” I said, “if you’re willing to give
up everything to follow him. Where did you meet him, if he
lives so far away?”
There was a slight pause. “Well …”
“Online?” I suggested.
“Yes.”
“So you haven’t actually met him in person.”
“No. But we’ve talked on the phone almost every day

for weeks.”
Let me state up front that I’m not a critic of some
online dating websites. There are far worse ways to meet
someone, and in fact, if it’s a good site, it can be a
valuable tool. No one need be embarrassed about meeting
someone through a site like that. Marriage is a good thing,
and being intentional about your pursuit of it is
commendable, not shameful. Using modern technology to
help you is something the church should applaud. But to
talk about leaving your entire life behind for someone
you’ve never even met face-to-face boggles my mind—yet
that’s how powerful infatuation can be. It can lead us to
talk crazy and, even worse, act crazy.
In fact, studies suggest that romantic attachment is
more powerful than the sex drive. Neurologically speaking,
it’s easier to say no to physical sexual passion than it is to
regulate the rush of emotional infatuation. And men, don’t
think it’s only women who read romance novels who are
susceptible to this. Because men are attracted to physical
appearance more than women are, most psychologists
believe that more men than women experience “love at
first sight.”
If you’ve found yourself in the throes of an infatuation

and acted foolishly, welcome to the club. It’s not easy to
learn how to manage these emotions, and you are far
from the first person to say or do stupid things
accordingly. But for now you need to understand that as
soon as you become infatuated, you are vulnerable and
stupid. I say this with all compassion. Don’t trust yourself.
Recognize what’s going on, and set some safeguards
(we’ll talk about these later).
Since, according to Dr. Helen Fisher, “romantic love is
tenacious and … difficult to control,”4 you can expect that
once you fall in love, it’s hard to fall out of love until the
neurochemical reaction fades. Your brain is focused on
two tasks during infatuation: getting that person and
keeping him or her. Your brain doesn’t have anything left
over to evaluate whether someone is worth getting or
worth keeping. The person you’re obsessed with can do
some awful, awful things, but infatuation is not easily
discarded. It’ll hang in there and won’t let go, despite all
evidence that this isn’t a person you should be with.
If you enter this battle without the guidance of friends,
family members, and pastoral support, you’re likely to
ignore obvious cues and even defend indefensible
behavior. You can’t be fully objective when infatuation

takes root, so it’s foolish not to listen to others who aren’t
in the “crazy state” that you are.
A quick word to the older readers here, perhaps those
who have a previous marriage in their past. Too many
middle-aged people say, “I’m older, I’ve been married, I
know what I want, so it’s okay to cut corners here. We
don’t need to take the time to get to know each other.”
That’s a very foolish mind-set. No matter how old you are,
when infatuation gets hold of your brain, you’re just as
blind as an eighteen-year-old experiencing his or her first
crush.
VULNERABLE
Not only are you stupid when you’re infatuated, but you
also become extremely vulnerable. I’m speaking as a
pastor who has witnessed the tremendous pain that
romanticism has led so many people into. Psychologically,
“hearts broken from love lost rate among the most
stressful life events a person can experience, exceeded in
psychological pain only by horrific events such as a child
dying.”5 If you dive in and let yourself go emotionally,
without even knowing whether the person you are falling
for is worthy of your trust, and that person then cheats on

you or rejects you, the fact that they are of low character
won’t remove your pain. You’ll feel tremendous loss.
It’s not the same for everyone, of course, but some
people have been known to die from a heart attack or
stroke following depression caused by a romantic breakup.
Neurologically, the pain of social rejection triggers some of
the same systems that physical pain does in the brain.
Your hurt is real, even though it’s emotional.
Why do that to yourself?
This makes it equally dangerous to play with someone
else’s emotions. One psychologist talked about the horrific
price some women pay when they emotionally entangle
themselves with a man whom they later spurn. Some men
react with rage (which is why you don’t want to commit to
a man until you know he can handle anger): “In our recent
studies, we found that an alarming number of men who
are unceremoniously dumped begin to have homicidal
fantasies.… The loss of love is enough to make a man
homicidal.”6
Women, take note: “Roughly half of the women who
are murdered in America every year are killed by the ones
who presumably love them—their husbands, boyfriends,
ex-husbands, or ex-boyfriends—in circumstances that are

remarkably similar.”7 The murders are initiated by
romantic love that was spurned or died.
Falling in love can be a very dangerous game. Be
careful who you play it with.
And, men, it’s just as dangerous to spurn a woman.
Some years ago, a Houston woman became so angry
when she found her husband with his mistress at a hotel
that she got into her Mercedes-Benz and ran over him with
her car. Still not satisfied, she circled the parking lot and
ran over him again. Even that wasn’t enough—she backed
up and hit him yet a third time, pinning him under the car,
while her daughter, who witnessed all this, cried out, “You
killed my dad!” The spurned woman didn’t stop until her
car was literally on top of her husband.
Particularly heart wrenching is that, with the car’s tire
on top of her husband’s body, the woman got out and
apologized to him, telling him that she still loved him.8
Emotions are powerful things; don’t play around with
them. And make sure you are with someone who has
power over his or her emotions. If I’m going to make
myself extremely vulnerable with someone, I want that
person to be ruled by the Holy Spirit, who can check those
negative thoughts and actions, rather than, in biblical

language, someone who is ruled by “the flesh.”
WISDOM WAITS
All of this, I hope, is an argument for not getting married
too hastily. Wisdom waits. Wisdom is patient. Blurting out
or acting on your feelings in the bloom of their creation is
a tempting but foolish thing to do: “Do you see a man who
is hasty in his words? There is more hope for a fool than
for him” (Prov. 29:20 ESV).
One young woman told my friend Virginia Friesen how
she had found “the man of her dreams.” She and her
boyfriend had been together just three months but were
already talking about marriage and even discussing setting
a date for the wedding that would allow just enough time
to plan the ceremony. The young woman told Virginia that
her boyfriend was “everything she had ever hoped for, and
so much different from the last man she dated.” Virginia’s
response was classic and wise, and one I hope you’ll
consider: “At the three-month mark, my former boyfriend
was also everything I had ever wanted. But by month six,
the relationship fell apart.”9
Dr. Fisher found huge discrepancies between the brain
scans of couples who had been in love just about eight

months and the scans of those who had been in love about
twenty-eight months. Those together just over two years
had a far more realistic view of their partner and their
relationship than those who were still in the rush of
infatuation.10
How many of your friends have told you, after being let
down by someone they truly loved, “He’s not the person I
thought he was”? That’s because he wasn’t. That’s a true
observation! They were relating to an idealized (fictional)
version of a man—or woman—not that person’s authentic
self.
Most couples won’t wait two years, and since our
brains vary, I’m not one to create an artificial barrier. I’m
more concerned that you have progressed to the point
where you have a reasonably accurate view of someone
than that you’ve made it to a certain point on the calendar.
Given all that we’ve looked at, however, I think wisdom
says you’re being a bit foolish if you get engaged in less
than a year. If you get married sooner than that, at the
very least you should do so with the blessing of objective
and wise friends. On your own, you’re making a bet, with
lifelong consequences, while in a mind-set that has been
proven to be at least somewhat delusional. It’s sort of like

signing a mortgage or buying a business while drunk. You
need to “dry out” a bit and think this thing through before
you commit the rest of your life to someone you can’t
objectively evaluate.
Every counselor—indeed, every married person I know
—will tell you that it’s far better to be lonely and single
than lonely and married. The cure for lonely and single is
almost always less painful and more hopeful than lonely
and married. If you rush into a marital choice and wake up
with a difficult coupling, you’re going to have to live with
some real disappointments. The Bible doesn’t give us an
“oops, I acted too hastily” clause when it comes to
marriage and divorce.
How foolish it would be to let a neurochemical reaction
guaranteed to fade in a matter of months lead you to
make a lifelong decision. How equally foolish to insist on a
short-term neurochemical reaction to consider a lifelong
decision. Is it possible you’ve neglected getting to know
some very fine marriage partners, simply because the
initial romantic attachment wasn’t strong enough? Are you
staying with someone who isn’t good for you, only because
the romantic thrill makes it so hard to leave?
Let me put this in another context. Let’s say that I, as a

man married twenty-eight years, “fall in love” with
someone other than my wife. Would you say that’s reason
enough for me to divorce my wife and pursue a romantic
relationship with another woman?
I hope not.
But if “falling in love” shouldn’t direct my actions as a
married man, why should it direct your actions as a single?
Don’t just say that the mere absence of a prior
commitment is what renders an infatuation moot. You’ve
already agreed, by my example, that infatuation isn’t an
absolute indicator of what we should or shouldn’t do. Your
commitment to “seek first the kingdom of God” should be
every bit as strong as my commitment to my marital vows.
If an infatuation would compromise that prior
commitment, you dare not follow it.
I’m trying to get you to see that falling in love, even as
a single, is something to evaluate, not something you
should slavishly give yourself over to. “Falling in love” is
what it is—a very pleasant, very real brain obsession—but
it’s a dangerous and false god.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Describe your first infatuation (if you’ve had one). Was

there a second or third infatuation? In hindsight, do you
think the person(s) you became infatuated with was
worthy of your romantic attention?
2. Can you relate to what researchers call the
“idealization” of someone—giving them qualities they don’t
really have, and being blinded to weaknesses? What can
people do to protect themselves against this?
3. Have feelings ever led you into a relationship that never
should have started? Have the lack of feelings ever led you
to end a relationship that should have been given more
time? What role do you want romantic feelings to play in
future relationships?
4. Have you ever known someone (perhaps yourself) who
got into a romantic relationship with a psychologically
unhealthy person? How did it end (or what are they
dealing with now)? What can this teach you about entering
into future relationships?
5. What do you believe is a reasonable time frame for two
people to progress from meeting each other to becoming
engaged? What do you base this on?
NOTES
1 Helen Fisher, “The Drive to Love,” in The New Psychology of Love, ed.
Robert Sternberg and Karin Weis (New Haven, CT: Yale University

Press, 2006), 88.
2 Fisher, “The Drive to Love,” 88.
3 Thomas Lewis, “Twenty-First-Century Love: The Neurological
Underpinnings of Human Relationships,” San Francisco Medicine 82, no.
6 (July/August 2009):13, http://issuu.com/sfmedsociety/docs/july-
august.
4 Helen Fisher, A. Aron, and L. L. Brown, “Romantic Love: A Mammalian
Brain System for Mate Choice,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society 361 (2006): 2173–186.
5 David M. Buss, “The Evolution of Love,” in Sternberg and Weis, The
New Psychology of Love, 76.
6 Buss, “The Evolution of Love,” 76.
7 Buss, 80.
8 Buss, 77–79.
9 Paul Friesen, Before You Save the Date: 21 Questions to Help You Marry
with Confidence (Bedford, MA: Home Improvement Ministries, 2010),
53.
10 Fisher, “The Drive to Love,” 91–92.

4
YOU DON’T WANT WHAT YOU
THINK YOU WANT
Let me talk to the women first, and then the guys.
However, I’d like both genders to read both sections so
that you can consider the weight of all that I’m suggesting
here. Part of finding the right person to marry is becoming
the right person, so take a hint and learn from what I’m
telling each gender to avoid.
AN EXCITING MISTAKE
Women, my goal is to get you to care about your
boyfriend’s godliness as much as a wife cares about her
husband’s godliness. It’s his character that will help keep
your life mission alive as feelings begin to fade. I’ve rarely
had a wife complain to me about her husband’s looks.
When wives send me emails, it’s almost always about
character issues: “He shouldn’t do this thing. He should do
that thing, but doesn’t. How do I fix this?”
Yet most women are not seeking men of character

first. They are seeking men with whom they feel “in love.”
If they do feel in love, they will excuse every fault they see
in their man, trying to make the relationship work. If they
do not feel in love, they will not seriously consider the man
as a potential mate.
Ironically, girlfriends are quick to justify seemingly bad
behavior in their boyfriends and try to explain it away,
while many wives are eager for everyone around them to
know how awful their husbands can be and how everyone
should feel sorry for them for having to live with such a
wreck of a human being. In fact, not long after they
become wives, women will fault men for the very things
they overlooked and defended as girlfriends. One woman
told counselor Winston Smith, “You don’t understand how
sick he is! Did I tell you what he did once in college?” Why
didn’t this episode bother her before she got married?
Having known this and accepted it, why bring it up now as
a wife?
Would that it were the reverse, with girlfriends
seriously discussing with their friends their boyfriends’
weaknesses so that they could make a wise decision, and
wives seriously defending their husbands’ honor so that
they could make a lasting marriage. Unfortunately,

ignoring your boyfriend’s weaknesses and gossiping about
your husband’s failures are two sure paths to divorce.
In front of a very large group, I asked all the married
women to stand up. Then I said, “I want you to sit down if
you disagree with me that a man’s godliness should be
one of the top two things a single woman should consider
when choosing a mate.”
Not one wife—not one—sat down. Every married
woman was telling every single woman: find a man with
solid character who is growing in the Lord and pursuing
godliness. That’s what those women value most as wives.
Yet many single women merely pay lip service to
character: “Well, yeah, character and godliness are
important, but I think my boyfriend loves God … in his own
way.”
Too many single women overlook some serious
character flaws or maybe even an absence of faith.
Because their feelings are so strong, they just can’t believe
this isn’t a match made in heaven. Rather than honestly
explore whether this man is worthy of their trust and
worthy to become their kids’ father, they spend their
energy trying to explain away his apparent flaws and to
make his spiritual maturity seem acceptable to friends and

family members.
Women, ask yourself, what will you most desire in your
man ten years from now, when you have kids and a house
and are sharing a life together and the infatuation has
faded? Find that. Look for that.
Most married women desire their men to be godly, to
have a good sense of humor (life is tough—laughing
helps), to be an involved dad, to have a strong work ethic.
And yet those four qualities sometimes take a backseat
with single women. Some are more attracted to the
dreamer who has lots of plans than they are to the
workhorse who puts in lots of effort. They value
immediate sexual chemistry over a man who keeps his
word and lives a respectable life. What so many single
women want is a guy who makes their hearts race, their
palms sweat, and their sexual chemistry boil, while so
many wives want a man they can count on, who will be
there for them and their kids every day, and who will
faithfully deposit a check in the bank at least once a
month.
If you don’t deal honestly with this discrepancy—what
you value now, and what you’ll value ten years from now
—you’re setting yourself up to live with many regrets.

Making a wise marital choice begins with giving proper
weight to more significant issues—a shared mission and
character traits that will bless you or plague you for the
next five or six decades—rather than sexual chemistry or
romantic intensity that will fade within months.
It is also easy for women to be carried away by a
man’s position. Maybe he’s wealthy. Maybe he’s a leader
in the church. So you make assumptions that because he’s
this or that, everything else must be okay. Here’s the
thing: you don’t marry a position. You marry a person.
Some wealthy guys are stingy. Some ministry guys are
jerks. Don’t let a guy’s position distract you from his
person. You’re looking for character, not status; you want
to find a man who is solid in his core, not just someone
who has a solid title.
Can I be blunt? Can I put on my “pastor’s hat” here for
just a second and flat out tell you what I hope you want?
Acts 6:3 sums it up perfectly: “Choose … men … who are
known to be full of the Spirit and wisdom.” This is what
the early church looked for in leaders of their
congregations, and it’s what you want to look for in
leaders of your home. Men who are filled with the Spirit—
they are alive to God, and God is active in them—and men

who are full of wisdom. You won’t regret making a choice
founded on that basis. Can this honestly be said about
your boyfriend? “He’s a man full of the Spirit and wisdom”?
If not, are you sure you want to settle?
A GORGEOUS MISTAKE
And for you guys—since I’m one of you, I know what
you’re looking for. We like to look, particularly at gorgeous
women. Science has established this (a 2009 Dutch study
demonstrated that attractive women can literally derail a
man’s cognitive functioning1), and the Bible concedes this,
telling young men in Proverbs 31 not to be led astray by a
woman’s beauty or charm, because both of these fade.
God knows that we are enthralled with physical beauty.
One of those Dutch researchers of the study I just referred
to—a published, high-degreed professor—met a stunningly
beautiful woman at an academic conference. As they
talked, he was eager to make a good impression, but
when she asked him where he lived, he literally could not
remember his street address.2
Within marriage, this captivation can be a wondrous
thing. It’s actually a blessing to be enthralled by your
wife’s breasts (Prov. 5:18–19), but when choosing a wife,

we also have to be careful about putting more weight on
things that last. In case you’ve never thought about it, a
woman’s body changes much more rapidly than her
character does.
The same is true of sexual chemistry—what launches
sexual chemistry won’t sustain sexual chemistry. Your
girlfriend might very well be all over you (physically) now,
but if you’re not married, that in itself is a sign of
selfishness: when she wants you, when her libido is high,
she’s enthusiastic and initiating. But if she loved you, if she
genuinely cared for you, she would want what’s best for
you in Christ. She would hold back from inappropriate
physical intimacy as she wouldn’t want to taunt you or
tempt you or pull you away from God.
I can’t tell you how many times I’ve seen this. It’s so
sad to speak with guys who think their sexually active
girlfriends will be sexually active wives just because in the
early days of the relationship, when the sexual chemistry
was so high, the only problem was reining in the affection,
not expressing it. In fact, however, it’s almost always the
reverse. If your dating relationship is sustained by sin,
what will sustain your marriage? If your girlfriend acts
selfishly as a girlfriend—wanting sex because she wants it,

and wants it now, regardless of whether you’re married—
why do you think she won’t act selfishly as a wife?
The same sin that moves your girlfriend to get too
physical before marriage is the sin that will kill or perhaps
maim sexual intimacy after marriage. Sin, by definition, is
overturning God’s created order. In God’s created order,
there should be no sex outside of marriage, and lots of
fulfilling, generous sex during marriage. Why do you think
a person will disobey God in the first instance, but obey
Him in the second? Doesn’t it make sense that if you shut
out God to do what you want to do in one season, you’ll
keep doing it in the next season?
That’s why, when choosing a wife, you want to find a
woman who is seeking first God’s kingdom now. You want
to find a woman who is seeking righteousness now. If she
isn’t a mission-based woman while you date, what will
make her a mission-based woman after the wedding?
And lest you think that “mission-based woman” sounds
boring, puritanical, and even asexual, let me assure you
that when it comes to sex, virtue is your friend. Find a
godly wife who is motivated by God, not just her own
desires. God will never stop loving you, God will never stop
caring about you, so if a woman is motivated by God and

listens to God, she’ll keep loving you, too (including
sexually), because she’ll get that love and motivation from
God. And, not to be mean or anything, but there are times
when you won’t be all that lovable. If your future wife isn’t
motivated by God, there’s not enough about you to keep
her interested.
This might shock you, but your best chance at sexual
satisfaction in marriage is not to focus on appearance
alone, but rather to find a woman of virtue. Proverbs 31
describes her as a woman who “fears the LORD.” When a
woman is motivated by kindness, compassion, generosity,
and understanding; when she is good at forgiving
(because I guarantee you, you’re going to mess up); when
she is desirous to serve as Jesus models service, she’s
going to be a very satisfying sexual partner and an overall
kind wife as well.
I have seen men drool over women who were all but
ignored as singles when they hear those women’s
husbands describe their loving service as wives. These
men missed out on some very fine life companions
because they were looking for the wrong thing. And I have
seen men marry gorgeous women who steadily became
less so, and those men made themselves miserable by

making such a superficial choice. Proverbs 12:4 warns
young men, “A wife of noble character is her husband’s
crown, but a disgraceful wife is like decay in his bones.” If
you’ve ever seen someone slowly waste away of cancer,
that phrase—“a disgraceful wife is like decay in his
bones”—should strike fear in your heart. You will be eaten
from the inside out when you attach yourself to a foolish
woman, however beautiful (or rich, or charming) she may
be.
Many men I’ve met have confessed that the reason
they are following the Lord so wholeheartedly is because
they married a strong Christian woman who wouldn’t have
married them if they hadn’t increased the trajectory of
their own spiritual growth. These men frequently confess
that they shudder when they think back to what they would
have become if they hadn’t changed. There might even
have been some mixed motives in becoming more serious
about the Lord, but the repentance took, the change has
been real, and they feel immeasurably blessed. That’s the
fruit of hitching yourself to a godly wife who inspires you.
I love being married to a beautiful woman; it’s a
blessing I won’t even try to deny. But I treasure, even
more, being married to a godly woman.

Here’s the reality: many women are led into marriage
primarily through romantic idealism, and many men are
swept to the altar through sexual attraction. Before you
can make a wise marital choice, you have to rid yourself of
inferior motivations. The wrong why will lead you to the
wrong who.
FLEETING FUN
Okay, let’s compare what the world values with what
Jesus teaches. The world values a brief, intense, romantic
attraction that makes us both vulnerable and stupid and
that lasts, on average, about twelve to eighteen months. It
celebrates making rash decisions in a storm of emotion. It
evaluates “love” by the intensity of an emotional
attachment that science tells us will never really last. In
other words, fleeting fun. This is the kind of love
celebrated in most movies, novels, television programs,
and songs. You’ve been conditioned to value it above all
else and have been told that it’s the only “authentic” love.
In Titanic, when Rose’s new boyfriend says running
away together doesn’t make any sense (especially since
they have known each other for less than seventy-two
hours), Rose responds, “It doesn’t make any sense. That’s

why I trust it.”3 While such a philosophy might make for a
compelling plot, it almost always creates a grief-ridden
life. Such thinking (or, better, lack of thinking) has led to
many foolish marriages and ruined lives. Romantic
infatuation is nice while it lasts, but its impermanence
leaves far more pain than its presence ever brought
pleasure.
In contrast, Jesus taught us to base our decisions on
something eternal: seeking God’s kingdom and His
righteousness. Jesus’s words urge us to find someone with
whom we can share a mission instead of an emotional
infatuation. Instead of telling us to find someone who
makes us lose all sense of objectivity, Jesus’s teachings
direct us to make a decision that will lead to righteousness
—to seek someone who will inspire us toward godliness,
who will confront us when we go astray, who will forgive
us when we mess up, who can encourage us with wisdom
when we are uncertain about how to proceed.
If we are spiritually healthy, this is the life we desire.
This is the life that leads to a growing joy, not a fading
attachment. The crucial “third stage” of relationship—
beyond sexual desire and romantic attachment—is long-
term affection. This is a bond that is best fostered through

friendship and a shared mission. It lasts until death and,
unlike romantic infatuation, gets deeper with age. Time
serves intentionally cultivated intimate affection, even as it
kills infatuation.
Jesus’s words—indeed, the whole of Scripture—call
God’s people to build a spiritual partnership. That’s what
you should be looking for: can this person walk with me
toward God? It’s not selfish to choose wisely in marriage;
it’s being a good steward of the one life God has given
you. If you marry someone with serious mental issues,
addictions, or character flaws, it’s like entering a marathon
with a heavy backpack. Ask yourself, will the person I’m
considering help me run the race God has laid out before
me, or will they act like an anchor dragging at my feet?
Granted, the marriage choice is different from simply
choosing a partner or friend. If there is no sexual
attraction, you’re going to have a difficult time fulfilling
your role as a husband or wife. If the thought of seeing
your intended naked makes you want to vomit, don’t marry
him or her. Sex is a significant aspect of marriage, and if
you don’t think you can enjoy and enthusiastically
participate in sexual relations, you shouldn’t get married.
In the long term, however, sexual intimacy dies in most

marriages due to relational issues more than a lack of
physical attraction. Two people who genuinely care for
each other, are kind to each other, share a mission
together, and want to grow together naturally feel a desire
to serve each other, and that includes sexual expression.
Secondly (we’ll talk more about this later), never forget
that you’re also choosing your future kids’ mom or dad, so
a person’s suitability to fulfill that role needs to be taken
into consideration. A certain degree of friendship and, yes,
compatibility, can foster the maintenance of a spiritual
bond. These are all important issues that should be added
to the overarching end of a shared spiritual mission.
In other words, there is more to think about when
choosing a marriage partner than Matthew 6:33 covers,
but there should never be less than that. If the person you
are interested in is not someone with whom you believe
you can seek first God’s kingdom and pursue a life of
righteousness, that’s a deal breaker. Never compromise
on Matthew 6:33. You need to add to it and build on it, but
you ignore it at your peril. It’s always more, never less,
when it comes to Matthew 6:33 and marriage.
STUDY QUESTIONS

1. Why do you think the same women who, as girlfriends,
often defended their boyfriends, now, as wives, often
complain about the same men who have become their
husbands? What’s going on here?
2. Is it realistic to ask people to consider a person’s
character above intense romantic feelings? How does one
learn to do this?
3. Gary suggested that most women end up desiring a
godly husband who has a good sense of humor, who is an
involved dad, and who has a strong work ethic, but that
single women are often drawn to the “dreamers” with
whom they have a strong sexual chemistry. Women, do
you think there are any discrepancies between what you’ll
desire in a husband and the kind of guy who interests you
as a boyfriend? Discuss these.
4. Given that men are biologically predisposed to be
impressed with physical beauty, how can they base the
decision to marry on a woman’s qualities that will outlast
physical appearance? Is this question even realistic to ask?
5. Compare and contrast what the world typically values in
romantic relationships and what the Bible suggests makes
up true and lasting love.

NOTES
1 Kayt Sukel, Dirty Minds: How Our Brains Influence Love, Sex, and
Relationships (New York: Free Press, 2012), ebook, loc. 3583.
2 Sukel, loc. 3588.
3 Titanic, directed by James Cameron (Los Angeles: Twentieth Century
Fox, 1997).

5
SOUL MATE OR SOLE MATE?
The young woman calling the radio program admitted that
the man she was dating was—for lack of a better word—a
jerk. He had cheated on her with her best friend, he had
no aspirations, and any objective person could see that the
guy she had fallen for was not suitable marriage material.
Still, she persisted in her devotion: “I know I can’t trust
him, I know he doesn’t treat me very well, I know he’s not
going anywhere—but … but … I think he may be the one.”
She recognized marrying him would be a disaster
because, frankly, dating him had been a disaster. But if
you believe there’s only one right person for you, and that
person just happens to be a selfish loser, what else are
you supposed to do?
Our culture has widely embraced the notion that there
is just one person who can, in the words immortalized by
Tom Cruise in Jerry Maguire, “complete us.” This is a
perilous mind-set with which to approach a lifelong marital
decision, even though it is the majority opinion. Studies

show that most singles are in a somewhat desperate
search for their “soul mate.” One Rutgers University study
found that 94 percent of single women in their twenties
say that the first requirement in a spouse is that he’s a
soul mate, someone with whom they feel an almost
cosmic connection. Just as surprising, 87 percent think
they’ll actually find that person “when they are ready.”
BLAME ZEUS
The origins of this “soul mate” line of thinking are so
bizarre you’ll hardly believe it, but it’s worthwhile to delve
into a tiny bit of philosophy to expose a line of thinking that
so many people today adopt without even really thinking
about it. Well over two thousand years ago, the Greek
philosopher Plato surmised that there was once a “super
race” of androgynous humans that made an attempt to
overthrow the gods. This super race consisted of “round”
people, comprising both male and female in one person,
and in that state they were getting too powerful, so Zeus
said, “I shall now cut each of them in two, … and they will
be both weaker and more useful to us through the
increase in their numbers.”1
The forceful cutting in two supposedly left both halves

desperate to be reunited. When the two halves did finally
find each other, all they could do was cling to each other,
which led to their deaths “because they were unwilling to
do anything apart from one another.”2 Zeus saved the day
—deprived and desperate humans are no longer so
powerful and no longer such a threat to the gods.
Notice, however, that in Plato’s view, romantic love
makes us weaker, whereas in the biblical view, love
makes us stronger. What is your love doing to you—are
you stronger in the midst of it, or do you feel more
vulnerable, weak, and perhaps even desperate?
Infatuation can lead us down the path of desperation,
can’t it? You feel so connected to someone that you can’t
bear to be apart, even for a few hours. You feel vulnerable
in a whole new way. Life apart from the relationship feels
so unimportant that it virtually stops. Well, Plato figured
that’s because there was a time when you weren’t apart
and therefore can’t function on your own.
He went on to suggest,
So it is really from such early times that
human beings have had, inborn in
themselves, Eros for one another—Eros, the

bringer-together of their ancient nature [i.e.,
man and woman as one being], who tries to
make one out of two and to heal their human
nature. Each of us, then, is a token of a
human being, because we are sliced like
fillets of sole, two out of one; and so each is
always in search of his own token.3
This is the philosophical foundation of the “soul mate”—
finding your lost half.
TRUE HUMAN NATURE
A scriptural view of human nature couldn’t be more
different. According to the Bible, our problem is not that
we’ve been sliced apart from an ancient human half, but
that we have been separated from God by our sin and
need to be reconciled to God through the work of Jesus
Christ on the cross. Once we are reconciled to God, He
brings us together as humans. Marriage is a wonderful,
even glorious reality, but it is secondary to our spiritual
identity as children of God and something that won’t even
exist in heaven (Matt. 22:30).
Our search for a life mate, then, isn’t one of
desperation, but rather one of patiently looking for

someone with whom we can share God’s love and live out
God’s purpose.
Plato’s “soul mate” philosophy circumvents the concept
of applying wisdom and replaces it with trying to mystically
discern whether you are “meant to be” with someone. For
every person who stumbles into a sensible matching with
this guidance, there are a dozen who act foolishly and
hastily. For starters, how do you know if someone is your
destined soul mate? Most typically, people try to discern it
through their feelings. They sense a connection unlike
anything they’ve ever known before. But we’ve already
established that infatuation is powerful, all-consuming
—and short-lived.
Some well-meaning believers might try to say, “I asked
God,” and while I applaud your pursuit of heavenly
guidance, can I at least question your objectivity and ability
to discern God’s voice when your brain is obsessed with
getting and keeping someone with whom you’ve fallen into
a deep infatuation?
Discerning someone’s character, true values, and
suitability for marriage is hard work. It takes time,
counsel, and a healthy dose of objective self-doubt and
skepticism. Identifying someone as “God’s chosen” or

Plato’s “soul mate” is comparatively easy. You “feel” it in
your gut. It seems right. You can’t imagine anyone else.
You must have found the one!
Such individuals marry on an infatuation binge without
seriously considering character, compatibility, life goals,
family desires, spiritual health, and other important
concerns. Then when the infatuation fades and the
relationship requires work, one or both partners suddenly
discover that they were “mistaken.” This person must not
be their soul mate after all; otherwise, it wouldn’t be so
much work. Next, they panic. Their soul mate must still be
out there! Such people can’t get to divorce court fast
enough, lest someone steal their “one true soul mate”
meant only for them.
The sad reality is that when we get married for trivial
reasons, we will seek divorce for trivial reasons. We need
something much more lasting on which to base a lifelong
commitment—one that even has eternal implications.
Let me ask you a tough question: if someone is willing
to marry you without doing the hard work of determining
whether you’re suitable to be their spouse and their future
kids’ parent, what makes you think they’ll do the hard work
of building a satisfying, God-honoring marriage? The way

someone chooses to get married is a good indicator of the
work they’ll put in after the wedding takes place in order
to make the marriage grow. If someone cuts corners in
the decision process—willing to risk their own and your
happiness on something as precarious as an infatuation—
how do you know they won’t want to cut corners when it
comes to the nitty-gritty work of building marital intimacy
stitch by stitch?
ARE YOU TRYING TO REPLACE GOD?
Take a deep breath. Your marital choice is crucial, but it
will never define you. If you are a believer, God—not your
marital status (or marital happiness or frustration)—
defines your life. Don’t put too much pressure on yourself.
Let the pursuit of marriage be one of joy, one you
undertake with your closest eternal companion—God
Himself—walking with you.
You’re not trying to replace God by finding your perfect
match—that’s desperation. You are already perfectly loved
and looking for someone who can help you grow in and
share that love—that’s security. Christians should never be
defined by the word desperate. We are well loved, well
cared for, adored by the One who knows us best, and

secure in His acceptance, love, affirmation, and purpose.
On the other hand, while it can be a tremendous ego
boost to have someone seem like they are desperate for
you, ask yourself if you’re willing to play the role of God in
their life. One young woman once told me (when I was
single), “I could never be happy without you.” When I
talked this over with my campus pastor, he helped me see
that this was a red flag. It initially felt nice to be so wanted
and needed, but he explained how someone who says this
of another human being isn’t in a right relationship with
God. Did I want to join my future with someone who
allowed God to have such a small role in her life that
another fallen human would forever determine her
happiness?
Before we can go on, you need to wrestle with this
question: do you believe there is only one right person to
marry? Perhaps you reject Plato’s soul-mate line of
thinking but have developed a “Christian alternative,”
something along the lines of finding the one person whom
God created “just for you.”
If so, how do you justify that biblically? Let’s look at the
evidence.

YOU’RE A REGENT: LEARN TO ACT LIKE
ONE
The language of the Bible doesn’t suggest there is one
right choice for marriage. Rather, all the teaching
passages seem to suggest that there are wise and unwise
choices. We are encouraged to use wisdom, not destiny,
as our guide when choosing a marital partner.
Proverbs takes a supremely pragmatic approach: “A
wife of noble character who can find?” (31:10). This verse
assumes that we are involved in a serious pursuit, actively
engaging our minds to make a wise choice. And the top
thing a young man should consider is this: “Charm is
deceptive, and beauty is fleeting; but a woman who fears
the LORD is to be praised” (Prov. 31:30). The Bible tells
young men to search for a woman of character; it reminds
these men that while looks won’t last, godly character
improves with age. It says nothing—absolutely nothing—
about “feelings.” It even warns against putting too much
emphasis on physical attraction or social grace. Instead,
this verse makes a woman’s faith the defining
characteristic of her suitability to be an excellent wife.
I can speak from experience: nothing compares to
being married to a godly woman—nothing! Kindness,

generosity, spiritual companionship—these all grow
deeper and truer and more pleasant over time. But I know
from counseling far too many troubled marriages that
there is also nothing more tedious and exhausting than
being married to a stunningly beautiful but narcissistic
woman.
You can take this too far; as I already stated, I’m not
suggesting you marry someone in whom you have no
sexual interest at all. But the first priority, according to
Scripture, is to find a spiritually compatible person, and
then, under that umbrella, find a sexually compatible
person. If you reverse those two categories, you can
expect to find short-term satisfaction at the risk of long-
term frustration. Let the “why” of marriage point you to
the “who,” and don’t let a stunningly beautiful “who”
change your reason “why.” (And if you are blessed to find
an awesomely godly and amazingly beautiful person, all
wrapped up in one, you are blessed indeed.)
When we jump forward to the New Testament, there is
no hint at all about finding “the one person” that God
created “just for you.” It’s far more a pragmatic choice: do
you think you’ll sin sexually if you don’t get married (1 Cor.
7:2)? Are you acting improperly toward a woman you

could marry (1 Cor. 7:36)? If so, go ahead and get
married—it’s your choice, and God gives you that freedom.
But notice this: the choice is made on the basis of seeking
righteousness. “Do you think you might keep sinning if you
stay single? Then get married.”
In helping people wrestle with the decision to marry,
the apostle Paul admitted that there are benefits to
singleness (particularly in the historical context out of
which he’s writing to the Corinthians) and benefits to being
married. If you’re unable to handle sexual temptation as a
single, Paul said, then by all means get married. This is,
blatantly, an admonition to base a marital decision on the
desire to live a more righteous life, knowing that without
marriage you might fall into unrighteous living.
Notice 1 Corinthians 7:8–9. Paul also left the decision
whether to get married up to us: “Now to the unmarried
and the widows I say: It is good for them to stay
unmarried, as I am. But if they cannot control themselves,
they should marry.”
Paul was simply modeling the pragmatic approach of
Jesus, who spoke matter-of-factly about people who were
born eunuchs (that is, able to live a satisfying life without
ever becoming sexually active) and others who “choose to

live like eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven”
(Matt. 19:12 NIV 2011). Did you get that word choose? Jesus
says it’s a choice. It is not wrong if you want to get
married; it is not wrong to want to stay single. The Bible
clearly says we shouldn’t feel forced to marry or feel
prohibited from marrying; this is one of those life decisions
God leaves up to us. But God does care about why we
decide to marry and the kind of person we marry.
The crowning piece of our argument, however, the one
the “Christian Platonists” are going to have a difficult time
overcoming, is Paul’s advice in 1 Corinthians 7:39, where
Paul clearly left the choice of marriage up to us in the
clearest, most explicit of terms: “She is free to marry
anyone she wishes, but he must belong to the Lord.” Did
you catch that? She is free to marry anyone she wishes as
long as the man she “wishes” belongs to the Lord. Could
Scripture be any clearer?
Scripture thus tells us that it is our choice whether we
want to get married and who we want to marry. In other
words, you get to choose. This isn’t a denial of God’s
providence, nor does it preclude God leading two people
together in certain cases. Rather, it’s the Bible’s way of
saying that while marriage is really important, it’s also

something God lets us decide whether we want to be
participants in, and who we want to be participants with.
God has given you an awesome responsibility, so choose
wisely.
The lazy and overly mystical might resent this teaching.
They might say, “That’s not fair, God—just tell me who to
marry, and I’ll get married.” That’s an immature attitude.
God created both men and women to be ruling agents
(Gen. 1:28), and as redeemed Christians, we will rule
again in eternity (1 Cor. 6:2–3). The ability to rule is
something we grow into, and marriage is a golden
opportunity to develop the discernment and discretion we
need to become fully functioning regents in God’s kingdom
work.
The need to find “the one” is based in desperation—as
if, apart from that “one,” we lack something. The Bible
views us as recipients of God’s perfect love, already
charged with an important life mission (seeking first the
kingdom of God), and thus the decision to marry, though
crucial, won’t define us. Nor will who we marry define us.
It’s sort of like this: medical wisdom says you need to
exercise and eat right to be at your best. How you exercise
—whether you ride a bike, swim, or jog—is really up to

you. Just exercise. The Bible says we need to live a
righteous life, including how we handle our sexual and
emotional desires, seeking first the kingdom of God above
all else. How we do that—whether as singles or marrieds,
whether pursuing an introverted bookworm or an
extroverted jock to be our life partner—is up to us.
In all honesty, this is a check on a secular culture that
makes too much of marriage. The warning behind this
reality is that if we make too much of marriage, we make
too little of our relationship with God. And when we make
too little of our relationship with God, we undercut our
source of love, which makes success in marriage less
likely. Focusing on marriage too much is, ironically
enough, the best way to kill it.
Men and women, find a partner with whom you can
seek first the kingdom of God, someone who inspires you
toward righteousness, and when you do, “all these things
will be added to you.”
MAKING THE CHOICE
The reason it is so crucial to adopt the Bible’s view of a
wise choice over “finding the one” is that the former
attitude allows you to objectively consider the person you

marry. There is no objective measurement of “destiny.”
How, indeed, can you possibly know if someone is your
soul mate? Powerful emotions can blind us to all sorts of
clues. But when we adopt the biblical attitude of making a
wise choice, we can use all that God has given us to arrive
at a solid decision that should be based on a number of
factors:
• Scriptural Mandates
Is the person a believer who fears God
(Prov. 31:30) and who is biblically eligible
for marriage (Mark 10:11–12)?
• Wisdom
How do they handle their money (Prov.
31:16, 18)?
Is this person a hard worker (Prov. 13:4;
26:13–15)?
Do they live an upright life (Prov. 13:6, 20;
25:28)?
Does this person wound people with their
words, or are they an encourager (Prov.
12:18; 18:21)?
Are they peaceful, or are they quarrelsome

(Prov. 17:19; 29:8)?
• Parental and Pastoral Advice
Your parents know you better than you may
realize, and even if they aren’t believers,
they still usually want the best for you. At
least consider their opinions. Also talk to
your pastor and other godly people you
respect: “Does this relationship seem like a
‘fit’ to you? Are there any areas you’re
concerned about?”
Proverbs 15:22 tells us, “Plans fail for
lack of counsel, but with many advisers they
succeed.” If the people I most respect had
serious reservations about a relationship, I
would assume I had lost my objectivity—that
I was both vulnerable and stupid due to
infatuation—and put all marriage plans on
hold.
• Prayer
Rejecting the notion that God creates one
person just for us doesn’t discount the
reality that God can lead us toward someone
and help us make a wise choice when we

seek Him in prayer. We want to surrender to
God’s providence by seeking and using the
gift of wisdom, applied learning, and rational
understanding.
Grappling with all of the above may not sound
romantic, but it is not antiromance. It’s entirely possible to
become infatuated with someone whom you would be very
wise to marry. The difference is, you’re not marrying them
because you’re infatuated with them. And, hopefully,
you’re not completely discounting other possibilities simply
because you’re not infatuated with them.
Instead of a “soul mate,” I’d like to suggest a more
biblical pursuit. It sounds exactly the same, but the
meaning is radically different. You need to look for a “sole
mate.”
WHAT IS A SOLE MATE?
A sole mate is someone who walks out with us (the “sole”
of a shoe!) the biblical command to seek first the kingdom
of God. This is all about the shoe-leather application of
biblical love. The most accurate definition of true love is
found in John 15:13: “Greater love has no one than this,
that he lay down his life for his friends.”

This love isn’t based on feelings; it’s based on sacrifice.
The Bible calls men to act like martyrs toward their wives,
laying down their own lives on their wives’ behalf (Eph.
5:25). Titus says older women need to train younger
women how to love their husbands (Titus 2:4). Need I
point out, men and women, that these are severe verses,
to an extreme? Martyrdom on behalf of your wife? Being
“trained”—actively studying and learning—how to love your
husband? This is heavy stuff. Guys, you may feel
infatuated now, but in agreeing to become a husband of
one wife, you are agreeing to put her needs above your
own for the rest of your life—regardless of what happens.
Are you ready for that? And women, as soon as you say “I
do,” you are committing before God and the community of
faith to expend your best efforts helping, loving, and
supporting this man. Infatuation fills your eyes with what
you’re getting, but let the Bible fill your mind with what
you’re committing to give.
These passages alone are enough to tell us that within
marriage, love is not an emotion; it’s a policy and a
commitment that we choose to keep in the harshest of
circumstances. It’s something that can be learned and that
we can grow in. Biblical love is not based on the

worthiness of the person being loved—none of us
deserves Christ’s sacrifice—but on the worthiness of the
One who calls us to love: “We love because he first loved
us” (1 John 4:19).
Christian life is a journey toward love, growing in love,
expanding in our ability to love, surrendering our hearts to
love, increasingly becoming a person who is motivated by
love. A “sole mate” appreciates that marriage is a
partnership committed to the task of walking out the
biblical mandate to always put love first. It’s not marked by
the couple who displays the most emotion, with the
biggest smiles on their faces, who can’t keep their hands
off each other; but rather, the women or men who,
through the duties and sacrifice of marriage, have trained
themselves to love with God’s love. They walk out the
gospel on a daily basis, forgiving, serving, and putting
others first in the most ordinary issues of life in such a
way that they see themselves in training for godliness.
Such a couple will grow together, as surely as merely
sentimental couples will grow apart.
A biblical sole mate who walks in this truth, who daily
travels God’s journey of sacrificial love, and who willingly
goes “into training” for godliness is a far more stable

foundation upon which to build a lifelong partnership than
the thought of the philosopher Plato. “Greater love has no
one than this: to lay down one’s life for one’s friends”
(John 15:13 NIV 2011). This may not sound like the most
exciting or emotional love, but it is certainly the truest
love. And it is the only kind of love that lasts.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Having read this chapter, do you believe there is just
one person you’re “supposed” to marry? What do you base
this belief on? How will this affect the way you approach
finding a marriage partner?
2. Discuss this statement: “Notice, however, that in Plato’s
view, romantic love makes us weaker, whereas in the
biblical view, love makes us stronger.” Compare that with
your own experience.
3. Do you think the way someone chooses to get married
(in a rush, without due diligence, or deliberately and with
counsel) might reflect whether they will put in the
relational work necessary to make a marriage succeed
and continue to grow ever more intimate throughout the
years? Why or why not?
4. Why is it dangerous to date when you feel desperate?

How can someone deal with such desperation responsibly
so that it doesn’t affect who they choose to marry?
5. Do you agree that the mystical approach of asking God
to just tell you who you “should” marry is an immature
way to approach getting married? Why or why not?
6. How might the “sole mate” notion of love—marriage
being designed not to complete us, but to provide us with
a life partner with whom we can grow in our ability to love
—affect who you consider marrying?
NOTES
1 Plato, Symposium, translated by Seth Benardete (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1993), 19.
2 Plato, 20.
3 Plato, 20.

6
A MATCH MADE IN HEAVEN?
ISAAC AND REBEKAH
As soon as I tell people that we shouldn’t assume God has
chosen one person just for us, they usually say, “What
about Isaac and Rebekah?” This is a tremendous love
story, and worthy of some consideration, so let’s spend a
little time looking at it to determine what the Bible really
does teach through this famous love story.
To bring those of you who haven’t read the story up to
date, in Genesis 24 we read that Abraham sent his servant
to find a suitable wife for his son Isaac. Abraham was
getting old and increasingly concerned that his son didn’t
have a wife. Without a wife, there could be no heir, and a
lot of very important promises hinged on Isaac producing
an heir. Accordingly, Abraham pulled his servant aside and
gave him the task of finding a suitable wife for Isaac.
Essentially, to keep the faith/racial bloodline pure,

Abraham wanted Isaac to marry a Jewish woman, not a
Canaanite. Right away, we see the limitations of using this
motivation in New Testament times, but let’s move on
from that.
Abraham’s servant prayed for success: “O LORD, the
God of my master Abraham, please grant me success
today, and show lovingkindness to my master Abraham”
(Gen. 24:12 NASB).
This is the first time in Scripture that we read of
someone asking God for specific guidance. From all the
rest of Scripture, we naturally assume that part of prayer
is seeking guidance, but this is the first recorded instance
of prayer being used in that way. And this first recorded
instance seeks guidance for making a wise marital choice.
From this we can deduce that it is not wise to reduce
the marital decision-making process to reason alone. Wise
decision making is to be applauded, but it is entirely
appropriate to seek God’s discernment, to listen to His
voice, to let Him give us some feedback on our
inclinations. We may get no confirmation or warning—but
it is wise to give God an opportunity to do just that.
Certainly, as in all important decisions, we should adopt an
attitude of prayer and ask others to pray for us as well.

KIND WOMEN ONLY NEED APPLY
Look not only at the fact that Abraham’s servant prayed
but also at what he prayed for:
Behold, I am standing by the spring, and the
daughters of the men of the city are coming
out to draw water; now may it be that the girl
to whom I say, “Please let down your jar so
that I may drink,” and who answers, “Drink,
and I will water your camels also”—may she
be the one whom You have appointed for
Your servant Isaac; and by this I will know
that You have shown lovingkindness to my
master. (vv. 13–14 NASB)
The “charismatic” way to read this is to suggest that
the woman’s response was neutral except to serve as a
sign: this would be the one God had chosen because she
was saying the right words. Go back and read those words
again. Another way to understand them is that Abraham’s
servant asked God to let the woman He had chosen be the
kind of woman who was described in this prayer (“may
she be the one …”). Such a woman would have had to be

extraordinarily generous and kind. Each camel could drink
up to twenty-five gallons of water. Asking God to choose a
woman who was willing to draw up that much extra
water, for ten camels, when the water had to be pulled up
(there were no “faucets” on a well), on the heels of a
comparatively minor request (one man’s thirst), is
tantamount to hitchhiking for a ride and asking God to lead
the driver to offer to take you cross-country. Such a
woman’s response would be abnormally generous, well
beyond the bounds of common civility and certainly way
beyond any cultural expectations of hospitality.1
Abraham’s servant wasn’t just asking for a sign; he
was asking for a woman of character who would be one in
a thousand. He clearly wanted his master’s son to have a
wife who would bless him with hospitality, so he wanted a
woman who would go well above a simple request. The
Bible praises Rebekah’s beauty and purity (v. 16), but the
servant was seeking a woman who was uncommonly kind
and generous. That’s what he wanted for Isaac.
And that’s exactly what we’ve been talking about: find
that person whose character shines above all others.
A CHOSEN FAMILY

In this instance, the most natural reading of Scripture is
that God had chosen one woman, Rebekah, to be Isaac’s
wife. But when applying this to your own life, consider the
following: God’s purpose in establishing a union between
Isaac and Rebekah required her to be of a certain
nationality. That is no longer the case for us when
choosing whom to marry (Gal. 3:28). Instead, we are
instructed to find a person of a common faith.
Furthermore, Abraham’s family was specially chosen to
bless the entire earth; while we are also chosen to build
God’s kingdom, Isaac’s pure bloodline and place in history
was a special calling, unique to his bloodline, particularly
as it related to producing certain heirs. New Testament
reproduction isn’t about bloodlines, but rather blood
application (the cross of Christ).
Also keep in mind, Old Testament narratives aren’t
always normative. The Old Testament describes what
happened, but that doesn’t mean we should copy what
happens, especially since the Old Testament isn’t always
explicit about denouncing clearly inappropriate actions.
While God clearly blessed the union of David and
Bathsheba with the birth of Solomon, it would be a
monstrosity of application to suggest that adultery and

then a covered-up murder is an acceptable method for
meeting and choosing a mate. Likewise, no one would
suggest that a widow should search for a man twice her
age, work in his field, and uncover the man’s feet in the
middle of the night to offer marriage, as Ruth did. Yet,
indisputably, these became significant unions and families
in the genealogy leading up to the birth of the Christ.
In other words, the story of Isaac and Rebekah is an
account of what was, but not necessarily of what should
be for all of God’s people. Just because there may have
been one ordained wife for Isaac doesn’t mean there is
one ordained wife for you. Of course, in your case it’s
entirely possible that God may have a woman He
particularly desires you to marry. It is certainly within a
reasonable understanding of God’s working through history
to believe that He can create and call two people together
under His providence to accomplish a particular work. But
even if that’s the case in your life, how can you discern
such a calling? I believe the wise response is to apply
everything we’ve been talking about. That’s how God’s call
is discerned. To presume on God’s call, or to confuse
infatuation with God’s call, is as foolish as ignoring God’s
call altogether.

What I see happening most often is that people seek
“God’s will” primarily as a shortcut. They don’t want to do
the hard work of finding and testing out a suitable mate,
so they seek a mystical or emotional sign that “this is the
one.” Friends, that’s foolish. Mystical leadings and
emotional connections are confusing at best and a
deplorable foundation on which to base a monumental
decision.
This is not to suggest that God doesn’t occasionally
work “outside the box”—I’m being as balanced as I can be
here. For example, it was clearly God’s will for Joseph to
take Mary as his wife (Matt. 1:20–25). If God appears to
you in a dream and says that He is fulfilling prophecies
through your future marital union, and you can be sure
that it really is God speaking, friend, marry that person!
But I seriously doubt that God will give most of us such a
certain and extremely specific direction. According to the
full account of Scripture, for the vast majority of us,
whether we marry, and whom we marry, falls under God’s
permissive will.
Thus, if you will keep reading, we will continue the
work of helping to equip you to make a supremely wise
marital choice.

STUDY QUESTIONS
1. The start of Isaac and Rebekah’s story teaches us to
cover the process of choosing a mate with prayer. How big
a role has prayer played in your own pursuit? Do you need
to increase this in any way?
2. How can the content of Abraham’s servant’s prayer—
searching for an extraordinarily kind partner for his
master’s son—direct our own prayers for a future spouse?
3. If someone truly believes that God is calling them to
marry a particular person, what are some reasonable
tests of that calling?
4. How can the story of Isaac and Rebekah direct our own
marital pursuit? In what ways is the story not relevant for
today’s believers?
NOTE
1 I’m drawing on the expositional insight here of Dr. Bruce Waltke,
Genesis: A Commentary (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2001), 328.

7
THE RELIGIOUS ROMANCE LOTTERY
“When it comes to choosing a mate, God will bring the
right person to me at the right time. I’ll just sit back and
wait.”
That sounds so spiritual, so trusting, so … holy.
But consider this attitude in virtually any other aspect of
life. For instance, how “holy” and wise does this sound: “I
don’t plan to apply to any colleges. I figure if I’m supposed
to go to college, God will make sure the University of
Texas sends me a letter, complete with a dorm key. That’ll
be my sign.”
Or this: “Why should I fill out any job applications? If
God wants me to work at Microsoft, He can have the CEO
give me a call.”
If someone spoke like that, you’d think that person was
a verifiable religious fanatic. But we put the language of
dating and finding a mate into similar “Christianese,” and it
sounds so noble: “Don’t worry about finding someone to
marry. If you just focus on God, He’ll bring someone along
at just the right time.”

There are some very disappointed people in their
thirties who lived by this philosophy and now fight
resentment toward God because they still aren’t married.
After all, wasn’t He supposed to bring their future spouse
to their doorstep?
Just as bad, many people show open disdain for
anyone who goes to college in part hoping to find
someone to marry or who even seems intentional in their
pursuit. I’m a firm believer in a good education, but let’s
be honest: most people will never use the degree they get
from college. That doesn’t mean the degree and
experience of learning aren’t valuable—they certainly are
—but the person you marry will have a far greater impact
on your life satisfaction than your major (or lack of one, if
you choose not to go to college) ever will. What’s so
wrong with spending four years trying to find a suitable life
mate—perhaps not as the main goal of college, but
certainly one of the top goals? Or, if you’re not a college
student, what’s wrong with attending a church that offers
many opportunities to meet eligible men and women your
age? It’s not like there’s only one right church to attend,
and if marriage is an honorable estate, and one church
gives you a better opportunity to enter that estate, well,

you could base your choice for a church on worse things
than that. If I’m looking for a job, I’m going to go to job
fairs. If I’m looking for a mate, I’m going to look in places
where I’m likely to find more options.
Some women are cautious, believing (with some good
reasoning) that they want a man to pursue them. What
I’m suggesting doesn’t contradict that; however, are you
putting yourself in situations where you can be pursued?
Are you in a place where you can be noticed? Can you do
anything to put yourself in somebody’s mind-set?
If you’ve got a group of girlfriends and want to let some
guys know you exist, the answer is so easy: it’s called
“food.” Throw a party. Feed the guys. They’ll figure out
who put the food on the table.
WALK TOWARD THE MUSIC
My wife and I arrived in Baden-Baden, Germany, late on a
summer evening. Our hotel sat in the midst of a
pedestrian district that, except for a couple restaurants
and gelato parlors, practically shut down by 8:00 p.m. We
weren’t ready to call it a night and wondered what we
should do.
In the distance, I could just make out the faint sound of

some music. “Hey,” I suggested, “let’s walk toward the
music. Something must be going on.”
Sure enough, there was. An outdoor concert serenaded
twelve to fifteen makeshift restaurants just outside Baden-
Baden’s famous casino, welcoming the tourists who were
there for the horse races that weekend. Apparently, one of
the reasons the pedestrian area was drained of all activity
was because the concert had sucked everybody over
there.
“Walking toward the music” isn’t a bad philosophy of
life. Doors might seem closed, the evening might seem
prematurely over, but if you can catch a glimpse of
nightlife or hear the sound of music in the distance, why
not walk toward it and see what you find?
Some Christians find themselves in a dating dead end.
There’s no one suitable where they work or at their
church. For their own reasons, they refuse to look at any
online dating sites. Instead of putting themselves in social
environments where they might find someone, they start
to feel bitter and angry and blame God for not bringing the
right one along.
Your passivity is not God’s fault. Walk toward the
music. See what you find. Become proactive, intentional,

and even energetic about finding someone to marry. When
God, through Scripture, asks young men, “A wife of noble
character who can find?” (Prov. 31:10), the entire
assumption is that such a pursuit involves a serious
search.
Studies and personal experience reveal that most
people find their eventual mate at church or work or are
introduced through family and friends. A growing number
are signing up for an online matchmaking service. These
are all solid avenues to explore.
Are you putting yourself in places where you can find or
be found? Do you hang out in places where the kind of
person you want to marry hangs out? The reason my son
chose the college he did was because, on his visit, he
discovered that the students he met there were the kind of
people he wanted to hang around for four years. If you
can’t change your work environment, you can change your
social calendar or where you exercise.
In other words, just because it’s difficult to find
someone, don’t just go back to your hotel room and call it
a night. Walk toward the music. Catch a glimpse of
possibility, and make the effort.

LAZY IN LOVE
My friend Steve Watters has wisely said, “People who
marry well aren’t lucky in love. They’re intentional in their
path.” Too many Christians are lazy in love—expecting God
to make up for their sloth.
When we view getting married as an intentional
pursuit, and if we accept the premise that there isn’t just
one person you can be happily married to, we can draw
the following conclusions:
• Instead of simply “waiting for God to bring
the right one,” go out and find a godly mate.
That’s what God specifically tells us to do in
Proverbs 31:10. It’s even what Abraham sent
his servant to do on behalf of Isaac.
• Choose social situations where you are
more likely to meet a diverse number of
people who qualify as acceptable marriage
partners.
• In the face of sexual temptation, increase
your odds of marrying well by getting more
serious about pursuing marriage, in part by
focusing on your own character—spiritually,

financially, relationally, and emotionally.
Taking sexual shortcuts hinders a healthy
marriage and delays a holy solution.
• Do what you can to make yourself more
attractive as a marriage partner. Learn how
to hold your own in a conversation. Don’t go
heavily into debt. If you need to get in shape,
do so. “Waiting on God” can be a cop-out if
you’re not working on yourself. Maybe God’s
waiting on you to get your house in order.
• Laziness never honors God. The Bible is
brutal when denouncing sloth. If you put off a
serious pursuit of marriage, if you deny the
need to keep yourself in good shape, don’t
blame God when you reap the consequences
of your own actions.
• While pursuing marriage is a good and holy
pursuit, it shouldn’t become the primary
pursuit. We are told to seek first the kingdom
of God, not seek first marriage. So don’t put
your faith, worship, and service on a shelf,
assuming you can pick it back up once you
find your mate.

Finding a wonderful life mate is not about winning the
lottery. It’s not a mystical exercise. This isn’t to suggest
you shouldn’t seek God’s guidance and make your choice
prayerfully—of course you should—but in the end, you’re
making a rational, biblically informed, and hopefully wisely
counseled choice. Own it—both the process and the final
decision.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Have you ever (or do you now) believed the opening
statement of this chapter: “When it comes to choosing a
mate, God will bring the right person to me at the right
time. I’ll just sit back and wait”? After reading this chapter,
have your thoughts changed at all?
2. Are there any ways in which you can begin walking
toward the music?
3. Since studies show most people eventually find their
mate at church or work, or are introduced through family
and friends, what can you do in the coming months to
more earnestly pursue a marriage partner through these
avenues?
4. What things might you need to address or improve in
your own life in order to be seen as someone that a

person would truly want to marry?

8
PASSIVE SURRENDER OR
PASSIONATE PURSUIT?
COMPELLING REASONS TO GET MARRIED
As soon as you put away the notion that there’s “one right
person” to marry, you can apply wisdom; and wisdom
says if you’re struggling sexually, it’s time to be even more
aggressive about finding a suitable spouse. God will honor
your motivation. In fact, putting off such a pursuit can be
spiritually reckless and morally dangerous.
Even if you disagree with what I’ve just said, I think
you’ll agree with these three points:
1. God designed most of us to get married. A
few may be called to celibacy, but
statistically, over 90 percent of us will
experience marriage at least once in our
lives.

2. You’ll never have a larger pool to draw
from for a suitable, godly marriage partner
than during your university years, or if you
attend a large church with an active singles
group. Don’t be ashamed of using this
opportunity.
3. God made you a sexual being but
commands you to restrict sexual activity to
marriage (1 Cor. 6:15–20; 7:36–38; 1
Thess. 4:3–7). At a certain point, for some
of you it will become overwhelmingly
difficult, to the point of courting temptation,
to delay the marriage that will allow a holy
expression of sexual activity.
Though the average age for a man to get married in
this country is now twenty-eight, and the average age for
a woman is approaching twenty-seven, the fact is, you’ve
been created by God with a body that is ready for sexual
activity a decade before that. (I don’t believe most
eighteen-year-olds are ready for marriage—but hang with
me here.) A cavalier attitude toward this disconnect can
result in premarital sexual sin that dishonors God and

threatens your integrity as well as your future sexual
satisfaction in marriage.
SEXUAL DESIRE: A MOTIVATION TO
MARRY?
A young college student once dismissed the biblical
teaching that God restricts all sexual activity to marriage
as “unrealistic.”
“The fact that God made us as sexual beings does
mean something,” I replied, “and in most cases it means
young people should get married much sooner than they
do.”
“So are you saying that the desire to be sexually active
is a good enough reason to get married?”
Few people today would question the motivation of a
young couple who proclaimed, “We want to get married
because we are head over heels in love,” even though
what they are experiencing is a flood of neuropeptides that
neurologists tell us will not and cannot last longer than
twelve to eighteen months. Sexual need and desire,
however, will be a constant for at least the next four or
five decades, if not more. Why is it nobler to base a
lifelong decision on a relatively temporary emotional

disposition and disregard a God-designed motivation that
may never fade? Not once does the Bible say, “If you’re
out of your mind with infatuation, by all means, get
married!” But it does say, “It is better to marry than to
burn with passion [or sexual desire]” (1 Cor. 7:9 NASB).
We Christians—believing in God as Creator—should be
the last ones to discount the delight and pleasure of
sexuality or the need to respect God’s design for this
relationship to take place within a lifelong commitment. In
fact, we honor God when we submit to the call to
marriage. Marriage is God’s creation, and we should
surrender to it as part of our worship. If sexual temptation
isn’t even an issue in your life, these words don’t apply to
you. But if you are pretending to believe in sexual purity
yet still leaving behind you a wake of sexual casualties,
demonstrating that you are particularly weak in this area
and likely to keep falling, you’re fooling yourself by
pretending otherwise. Not only are you hurting others, but
you’re developing attitudes and habits toward sexuality
that will hinder sexual satisfaction within marriage and
become a burden to your future spouse.
CULTURAL CONDITIONING

Those of you who may be struggling with sexual
temptation but are still insisting on a romantic “storm of
emotion” before you get married should at least realize
that you’ve been culturally conditioned to think this way.
Dr. Hsu, a Chinese anthropologist, wrote, “An American
asks, ‘How does my heart feel?’ A Chinese asks, ‘What will
other people say?’”1 He claimed that “the Western idea of
romantic love has virtually no appeal for young adults in
China.”2
A poll of single people in India asked how many would
be willing to marry someone if their potential partner had
the right traits, but lacked the “emotional chemistry” of
infatuation. A full 76 percent said they would get married
anyway, while just 14 percent of US students said they
would.3 A 1988 study found that Indian “arranged”
marriages rated higher in marital satisfaction than did
American “love” marriages.4 An Indian woman explained
to me the experience in her culture when she said, “Love
marriages start out white-hot and almost immediately cool
down; arranged marriages often start out lukewarm and
slowly warm up.” Less than a decade into marriage (which
is really just the beginning, as your first child won’t even
be in junior high by then) arranged marriages generally

pass love marriages in intimacy and satisfaction.
I’m not advocating the process of arranged marriages,
but I am suggesting that we could learn from our friends
in the East about what provides a better foundation for
choosing a long-term marital match. Isn’t there a way we
can use the wisdom applied in arranged marriages—an
objective, practical look at how two people can form a
family—while still accepting the reality and thrill of
romantic attraction?
So, let’s tie this in with the previous section: I’m not
suggesting that sexual desire alone should lead you into
one particular marriage, but it should lead you to take the
marriage pursuit more seriously and perhaps seek a
permanent relationship earlier than you might otherwise.
In doing this you might have to “compromise” on feelings
of infatuation, but if you can learn to give proper weight to
other concerns, that’s not such a big risk. Personally, I
wouldn’t recommend compromising on a future partner’s
character just so that I could become sexually active within
marriage a little sooner—but if I was feeling regular
temptation, I would certainly make more effort to find a
suitable person to marry.
By all means, instead of staying at home and wasting

time abusing pornography, watching endless romantic
comedies while you complain about how no good men can
be found, or passing the time on weekends looking for
hookups, you’re much better off putting that time and
effort into finding a sole mate with whom you can seek
first the kingdom of God.
WHAT ABOUT FINANCIAL STABILITY?
One of the most common arguments for delaying marriage
is financial stability. As one who got married at twenty-
two, I have to confess that my wife and I did indeed marry
ourselves into a financial hole that took years to climb out
of. On the other hand, since I got married six years sooner
than the average man does today, I also enjoyed
becoming an adult with the woman I loved (not to mention
seventy-two more months of guilt-free, God-honoring sex).
And who’s to say my wife and I wouldn’t have struggled
financially as singles? Between you and me, I don’t see too
many uber-wealthy twenty-four-year-old singles who don’t
have to deposit their paychecks as soon as they receive
them.
On a cross-country trek with my son and his best
friend, my son’s friend mentioned that he was afraid

getting married too young would cause him to miss out on
the “single life.” This guy is a committed believer—we had
already talked about his desire to remain a virgin until he
gets married. So I asked him, “What are you missing out
on, exactly? Living with a bunch of guys, watching sports
and maybe drinking beer, playing video games all
weekend? Or doing that much less often but getting to
spend every night with a woman you’re good friends with,
really attracted to, and also having an active and satisfying
sexual life with?”
Listen, if you’d rather spend an evening playing Xbox
with your bros and going to bed on your own than driving
back to an apartment where your wife is waiting for you,
well, that’s up to you. But I honestly don’t think you’re
missing out on all that much. It’s a matter of personal
preference, but if you’re committed to living a God-
honoring life—no sex before marriage, no drunkenness,
not wasting gobs of time on meaningless entertainment
(some downtime is of course appropriate), what is
marriage holding you back from?
If it’s about delaying marriage for a year or so to get
settled in your job and gain a more solid financial footing,
that’s one thing. But putting off marriage to indulge

adolescent fantasies of eating junk food, watching junk
movies, having junk conversations, and drinking junk beer?
Sorry, but I just don’t see the allure.
On a positive spiritual note—I’m being vulnerable and
honest here—by marrying young, I severely curtailed the
possibility that my sexual drive might lead me to sin
against some of God’s daughters. I was able to learn how
to use my body to give my wife pleasure and to meet her
sexual needs instead of taking advantage of girlfriend after
girlfriend as I stumbled along, only partially containing my
libido. I knew I was vulnerable in that area; I don’t have a
perfect past. Taking stock of my spiritual weakness, early
marriage seemed like a wise thing to do.
For some of you—particularly those of you who are
facing the struggles I did—the call to be holy is a veiled
call to get married. It’s better to admit your weaknesses
and make provision for them than to pretend you’re
something you’re not and suffer the consequences when
your true character surfaces. Caring about not hurting girls
or tempting boys you’ve not yet dated trains you toward
compassion. And compassion will serve you very well in
marriage.
Being thoughtless, selfish, predatory, or sexually

manipulative toward others corrupts your character.
Continued failure in this area gradually turns you into a
certain kind of selfish, predatory person and sets a pattern
that you’ll have to consciously resist and recover from later
in life. This will decidedly affect the quality and climate of
your marriage.
It’s not just about you, not if you hope to become one-
half of an intimate marriage. You’re building a character,
right now, by how you approach the choice to get married.
And that character is the person you’ll either bless or
frustrate a spouse with. It’s also the character you’ll draw
on to raise your children. Right now, today, start becoming
a man or woman your kids and future spouse can respect.
Make this a season of growth, not a season you’ll one day
wish to forget.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Why do you think the average age of first marriage
continues to rise in our culture? Are these good reasons,
consistent with Scripture, or do you think the trend should
be reversed? Why?
2. How can someone who is facing tremendous sexual
temptation/frustration use that as motivation to find a

suitable mate to marry, while still using other criteria to
choose who to marry? In other words, how can someone
be motivated by sexual desire but not ruled by it when
actively pursuing marriage?
3. Do you think it is wise to marry someone you highly
respect and enjoy being around, but for whom you don’t
have intense feelings of infatuation?
4. How important is it to you to be “financially secure”
before you get married? How can this be balanced against
other issues?
5. Were you surprised to learn that arranged marriages
often exceed “love marriages” in perceived intimacy in the
second decade of marriage? How should this affect the
process of choosing to get married in our culture?
NOTES
1 Francis Hsu, Americans and Chinese (Honolulu: The University of Hawaii
Press,, 1981), 50.
2 Deborah Lieberman and Elaine Hatfield, “Passionate Love,” in The New
Psychology of Love, ed. Robert Sternberg and Karin Weis (New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press, 2006), 277.
3 I realize I cited a similar sounding study that put the latter number at 9
percent, not 14 percent. Studies differ in their findings, but both studies
demonstrate that the number is very low, whether it’s 9 percent or 14
percent, or somewhere in between.
4 Paul Yelsma and Kuriakose Athappilly, “Marital Satisfaction and
Communication Practices: Comparisons among Indian and American

Couples,” Journal of Comparative Family Studies 19.1 (1988): 37–54.

9
WHAT’S YOUR STYLE?
It was a particularly sad comment, one I wish he had
considered before the marriage began. A Christian athlete
explained that he was divorcing his wife because, “If I
wanted a model or television star, I would have married
one a long time ago. All I wanted was a housewife.”
There’s nothing wrong with wanting to marry a woman
who has an exciting career and enjoying the extra income
that results—and there’s nothing wrong with preferring to
marry a woman who wants to focus on the home and be a
full-time mom and wife. The problem is that couples often
aren’t honest about what they want before they get
married, which leads to great conflict (and sadly, divorce)
after marriage. When choosing someone to marry, when it
comes to this issue, don’t ask yourself what’s “politically
correct” to desire or what you should desire. Be honest:
what do you really want? Be careful about compromising
on it, because if you make an exception, you will likely
regret it. Marriage is a long journey, and a small regret

can grow into a great frustration that leads to divorce.
“Seeking first the kingdom of God” is a very wide
umbrella. There are different ways of seeking that
kingdom and expressing God’s righteousness. You can be
businesspeople or missionaries, you can live a life focused
on the arts or athletics or media. But don’t ever assume
that your motivations are the same or that you even mean
the same thing when you say “married.” There are many
different styles of marriages, but few singles ever explore
this disconnect.
Here’s what I want you to ask yourself as you embark
on your search for a vibrant sole mate: what will your
ideal marriage look like? Will the two of you spend your
lives “sucking the marrow out of life,” or working hard to
establish a business and/or ministry (and often spending
evenings and weekends recovering)? Will you seek to build
a child-centered family, focusing on the kids, or have you
always thought you’d like to do a lot of foreign travel or
maybe just adopt one or two children? Will you have
separate hobbies, or would you prefer to do everything
together?
Many people assume their partner is looking for the
same thing they are when they talk about “being married,”

but that is rarely the case. We have an image in our mind
of what our marriage will be like, but we don’t usually
label it or even express it. We just assume that our
partner shares it.
Two people who are both hungry don’t necessarily
want to eat at the same restaurant; two people who want
to get married are not necessarily seeking the same style
of relationship. In fact, many people often aren’t aware of
what they want. They have unspoken, unnamed
assumptions. Until you see marriage patterns listed, your
wants may not occur to you.
Once you become “serious” about someone to marry,
you and your potential spouse need to get vulnerable and
be as honest as you can be as you explore this. The
temptation will be to say what you think the other person
wants to hear, but that’s setting up both of you for
considerable disappointment and even lifelong frustration.
Lying about what you want out of marriage going in
because you’re afraid you’ll lose the relationship if you are
honest is one of the worst kinds of fraud you could ever
commit. You’re asking someone to give his or her life over
to a lie. And you’ll eventually be found out. You can’t
sustain a lie for fifty years. You may worry about hurting

someone’s feelings if you begin to sense that the two of
you aren’t cut out for each other, but be more concerned
about hurting that person’s life. Don’t serve your feelings
by covering up the truth; make your feelings serve you.
To give you a practical tool to help you do this, we’re
going to look at some of the more common marriage
“styles.”1 There are many more styles, of course, but this
list will get you thinking about the possibilities. Some of
these, quite frankly, are terrible reasons to get married,
while others are morally neutral—a matter of preference
more than values. You shouldn’t get too serious with
someone until you’ve carefully considered your own
motivations and future desires and also developed a
somewhat objective understanding of what your partner is
looking for. The best way to be objective here is to rank
yourself independently from your partner (or, for many of
you, take this test before you even get a partner).
We all have a mixture of motivations, of course—I’m
not trying to put any of you into a box. But I am trying to
give you a tool that will help you understand your
unspoken assumptions. If you allow yourself the freedom
that comes from the truth that there isn’t just one person
you can marry, you’ll be more objective and honest when

going through this exercise. If your marital visions are
worlds apart, marital style is not something you should
compromise on.
Have you ever asked yourself, “When I say I want to
get married, what kind of marriage am I thinking about?”
Well, now you can—after you read this chapter.
A SPIRITUAL SOLE MATE
Let’s assume the best right at the start, shall we? A
spiritual sole mate is someone who is passionately
committed to getting married for the glory of God first and
foremost. Such people want to build a family that will
model God’s ministry of reconciliation to the world. They
want to raise kids who will follow and serve God. They
want to create a home that is a fortress for God’s work on
this earth. They want to partner with someone who will
help them grow to become ever more like Christ.
Seeking a spiritual sole mate above all else doesn’t
mean you don’t have other motivations and additional
marital styles, however. There is nothing wrong, or
contradictory, with wanting to marry a spiritual sole mate
first but also wanting to enjoy an out-of-doors lifestyle or a
companion who enjoys foreign travel. I’m hoping that the

spiritual sole mate model will rule every Christian’s heart,
and that these other styles will be subsets, but I’m also
realistic that spiritual maturity is something we grow into
and that maturity brings evolving motivations. If you’re
already in a serious relationship, try to be honest and ask
if your partner would truly pursue a “spiritual sole mate”
marriage with someone else if you weren’t part of the
picture. In other words, does your partner really want this
kind of spiritually intimate marriage, or do they just want
to be married to you and know you wouldn’t have it any
other way? And then ask yourself, is the spiritual sole
mate model of marriage something you’re willing to
compromise on, something you feel only mildly interested
in, or something you are passionately committed to?
I can’t tell you how many women have come to me
with discouragement clouding their souls because they
compromised on this and married spiritually anemic men.
They thought everything else going well in the relationship
would make up for a lack of spiritual fervor. To a woman,
every one I’ve talked with has regretted making that
compromise. If you want a spiritually rich marriage,
women, you must marry a spiritually alive (and growing)
man.

Rank your desire for each of the following
styles of marriage on a scale of 1 to 10 (1 =
this isn’t me at all, and it would be difficult
for me to be married to a person who wants
a marriage like this; 10 = this describes my
assumed view of the marriage relationship
very accurately): _____________
BUSINESS BUDDIES AND ROMANTIC
IDEALISTS
After Prince Charles and the future Princess Diana
announced their engagement, an interviewer asked Prince
Charles if the couple was “in love.” Diana jumped in and
answered for her future husband by saying, “Of course.”
Obviously flustered and taken aback, Charles added a
famous addendum: “Whatever in love means.” It was a
painful moment, and one that proved prophetic. It seems
clear, in hindsight, that Prince Charles and Lady Diana
Spencer were seeking two very different things in their
relationship. Charles seemed to be seeking a good match
for a future king. Lady Diana’s pedigree and youthful
vitality seemingly fit those needs. Diana appeared to be
seeking romance, fulfillment, and a storybook life.

When the marriage unraveled, Diana made it clear
through various journalists that she felt betrayed (as she
likely was). The earliest betrayal, however, might have
been that from this early interview it was clear that the
two of them were looking for two very different things in
their marriage. That’s a setup for major disappointment.
Some people, like Charles, are looking for a life partner
who is a good “fit.” Together, they can build a business, a
family, a church, a name, or even rule a nation. They are
not carried away by romantic notions or expectations; all
that seems rather silly to them. They want a suitable
partner for a satisfying and productive relationship.
Such a pragmatic matching isn’t necessarily a bad
thing, but if one of the partners is looking for a more
romantic connection, there will be serious disillusionment
when they marry someone who has a fairly utilitarian
mind-set. Some guys aren’t very romantic, but they feel
socially inadequate and so want to marry a woman who is
skilled at relationships. Some women want to find a good
father for their children. Some men might have high
expectations that their wife earn as much as they do.
Romantic idealists—like Diana—expect to get much of
their joy and fulfillment in life from a consistently intimate

marriage. They have notions that they were incomplete
before they met their true love, and they expect their true
love to be their best friend and constant lover, and to work
hard at keeping the romance alive. They realize that
infatuation will fade, but they are committed to making the
relationship the center of their life (perhaps after their
relationship to God).
Romantic idealists can be marked by obsessive
clinginess, fear, jealousy, frequent feelings of being
slighted, and even acts of desperation. I don’t mean to
make this sound unnecessarily negative. It’s possible to be
a mature and even secure person with a romantic bent;
my descriptions, for the sake of clarity, travel to the
extremes. Without critiquing who you think you should be,
admit honestly who you are. For whatever reason, a
romantic idealist’s sense of security, self-worth, and
happiness are directly tied with a very short leash to the
current health, vibrancy, and romantic intensity of the
relationship. This intensity is exciting and invigorating
during the infatuation stage but can become exhausting
afterward.
If you’re a romantic idealist, you’re going to become
very disappointed when your partner focuses on his

business or hobby. If you’re married to a romantic idealist
and you’re not one yourself, you may become exhausted
with the demands placed on you emotionally, physically,
and relationally.
What are your expectations in this regard? What are
you hoping to get out of this marriage? Do you want to join
yourself to a suitable partner, or do you want to get lost in
a wild, never-ending romance? (Keep in mind, if you think
you’re “in between,” you can simply rank yourself a “5” in
each category.)
Your rank:
Business Buddy: _____________
Romantic Idealist: _____________
ADONIS AND APHRODITE
This is a relationship based on sexual attraction and
beauty. In its crassest form, it’s when you see the
bodybuilder marry the petite woman who has had various
cosmetic enhancements. I’m not trying to suggest that
every such coupling is so superficial—many times it may
not be—but it helps to point out a potentially troublesome
motivation. While physical attraction is a key component
for marital satisfaction, if it becomes the main attraction,

what are you going to do when your body ages?
To be fair, sometimes such attractions are due to
lifestyle more than appearance. Healthy living, healthy
eating, and fitness are noble values. Physical attraction as
the main thing drawing the two of you together —even if
it’s through things like exercise and competition—is fine in
your youth while you can enjoy regular exercise and joint
trips to the health-food store, but what happens if your
health-loving spouse gets cancer? Mutual attraction is a
shaky foundation, because marriage is about growing old
together more than it is about being young together. Is
this a person for whom age will increase your devotion
and respect, or will this person gradually lose what most
draws you to them now? In other words, are you in this
relationship largely because the sexual chemistry and
attraction is so strong, or because the respect and honor
you feel for this person is so deep?
If you think your partner is most drawn to you because
of your beauty or strength, the relationship is in a perilous
place. Beauty and strength serve a ten-year Hollywood
career very well, but they’re painfully short-lived servants
of a fifty-year relationship.

Your rank: _____________
COOKBOOK COUPLE
A “cookbook” relationship exists when one partner thinks
they just need to find the right strategies, add in the
correct ingredients, and then they’ll get just what they
want out of the relationship. You notice a cookbook
relationship is forming when one partner seems somewhat
obsessed with the process. (“No, we don’t kiss until the
third date.… We meet each other’s parents at this time.…
Our friends need to meet with us in this way.… You’re
supposed to celebrate your first Christmas/Valentine’s
Day/anniversary like this.…”) Such people typically read a
lot of how-to books, fill out several relationship surveys,
and want many sessions of relationship-oriented
discussion.
I’m not suggesting that advice books aren’t helpful, but
if you’re going to marry a cookbook spouse, you’d better
be ready to participate in these kinds of discussions.
They’re going to want to be in marital counseling (which is
a good thing; every couple could benefit from counseling
now and then), and you can all but be assured that they
will give you books and articles now and then that they will

want you to read—and be very frustrated if you don’t. (Do
you have any idea how many women have told me they
regularly check to see if the bookmark has moved in a
book they’ve given their husbands?) And yeah, you’re
going to have to reserve some weekends for marriage
conferences.
Again, I’m not trying to label all of these as good or bad
descriptions; in many cases, they are a matter of
preference. There can be many positive things about being
married to someone who wants to improve their skills as a
communicator and spouse. But some people would see
such a relationship as exhausting. If a cookbook partner is
marrying someone who despises that approach, there will
be great frustration. If they both enjoy that sort of thing,
their common bent will help them build deep intimacy
rather than threaten it.
Your rank: _____________
THE PASSIONATE PARTNERSHIP
A passionate partnership is marked by two people who are
committed to making each other their highest priority—
above recreation, child-rearing, vocation, extended family,
hobbies, and just about anything else (notice I didn’t say

God). A passionate partnership can seem intimately
intense and satisfying when two people enjoy it and
suffocating when just one of them wants it.
A person with a passionate partnership mentality reads
this and thinks, “Of course, doesn’t everybody want
this?”—not realizing she may be dating someone who
really enjoys focusing on his business but doesn’t want to
talk about it when he comes home. Or a guy marries a
woman who is so into her kids and homeschooling that
she would perhaps rather her husband take the kids out
for a nature walk when he gets home from work than
spend forty-five minutes reliving his day with her. Some
guys would really rather play eighteen holes of golf on
Saturday morning without their wives. Other couples think
any hobby in which both can’t participate is simply
unacceptable.
Of course, every marriage should prioritize the marital
relationship above work and even parenting—but
passionate partners take it a notch higher. They believe
the relationship must be nurtured, and they are committed
to keep nurturing it throughout their lives. Whatever they
experience, they want to experience together, so if one is
called away on a business trip, the other will try to come

along. Long conversations, plenty of time alone as a
couple, and making each other the emotional center of
their existence are expected, enjoyed, and cherished.
Two people sharing this vision will, indeed, maintain an
intensely intimate and satisfying relationship. They will not
have problems with leaving the kids for a date night or a
weekend away; indeed both will be committed to this and
even look forward to it. They may well look forward to
becoming “empty nesters” so that they can once again
focus on each other. They will not let work demands or
volunteering opportunities break into their relational time
together. The problem arises only when you have one who
wants to have a passionate partner relationship and one
who doesn’t.
Your rank: _____________
THE HORROR-SHOW HOUSE
This is a relationship style that has no upside, and I
mention it so you can avoid it. Some people become
interested in a relationship only when they are terrorized
by or terrorizing their partner. It’s true: the reason some
people are attracted to each other is that, for reasons
often related to past wounds and bent personalities, one

person likes to be terrorized and one person likes to do
the terrorizing.
These couples fight, argue, make each other miserable
and afraid, and may even have quite vigorous makeup sex.
Exhausted and spent, they peacefully coexist for another
short season until routine sets in and they start the horror
cycle all over again.
The problems with such a relationship are many. Often,
the one who once felt comfortable being terrorized
eventually gets tired of it. And this form of love is so
directly in opposition to agape biblical love and marriage
that it’s a relationship doomed to fail.
If you feel most connected to someone when they are
terrorizing you, or you feel closest to someone when you
are terrorizing them, you need to know this is a spiritual
sickness and a fake intimacy. You need to get healed, not
married, and in that order. You can’t build a healthy
relationship on an unhealthy pattern of relating. You need
to deal with this before you even think about making a
lifelong choice.
I’ve put this in deceptively stark terms to point out its
harm, but try to discern the more subtle flavors of such a
matching. Does everything seem fine between the two of

you—until your partner unleashes some kind of crisis? He
or she gets in trouble, cheats on you, or does or says
something particularly cruel? He or she apologizes, you
make up and think it was a onetime event, but when
things settle down and start to get routine, guess what?
Another crisis erupts. This is a predictable, unhealthy
pattern signifying that the two of you would rather live
through terror than walk through the calm. Not only is it
personally destructive, it’s a prescription for parental
disaster. Kids crave stability and are harmed significantly
by never-ending crisis.
Your rank: _____________
HOUSE AND HOME MARRIAGE
We’ve lived by a neighbor who was obsessed with her
yard. She mowed the lawn every other day. Just about
every other week, she was spreading some new fertilizer
or growth aid on the grass. Every time she spoke with us,
she talked about her plants, her edging, her landscaping,
the health of her trees as if they were her children. When
I talked to her about a lawn-care company, she looked at
me with a horrified expression: “You realize, don’t you,
that they will use the same lawn mower on your yard that

they do on everyone else’s? Who knows what kind of lawn
disease they’re spreading?”
Other people can fixate on a home’s interior. If you
added up how much time they spent on the Internet
checking out new furniture, fixtures, home accessories,
etc., it would put their Bible study to shame. Some sit in
the living room, just waiting for something to break so that
they can spring into action and fix it. Remodeling is, to
them, a fulfilling hobby, and they will never truly be done
tinkering with their house or yard.
Others see the house as a place to retreat to, but the
shape, size, state, and picture-book quality have zero to
do with their ego or sense of worth. They may not want to
live in a messy house, and they may even enjoy living in
an aesthetically pleasing house, but they certainly don’t
want to sacrifice Saturday or Sunday afternoons to keep
up the house. They’d rather exercise, go to a movie, take
a walk, or even take a nap.
This is largely a matter of choice, and when two people
both enjoy dedicating themselves to their house and yard,
the pairing can be quite satisfying. Where it becomes a
problem is if one partner is more concerned about
hospitality than house projects, or if one would rather

spend two thousand dollars on a trip to Europe than on a
new sofa. You’re also going to run into problems if one
would rather get more aggressive in their financial giving
than spend the money on lawn equipment or plants.
Be honest. How will you focus your energies: on a
mansion or a mission? If you’re a mission person marrying
a mansion person, you’re going to be very frustrated. The
challenge is that just about every Christian mansion
person will say that they want to be a mission person. It
sounds better, more spiritual. But after the wedding, they
can’t wait to get that new home set and will be perfectly
willing to start inviting people over after the walls get
painted, the new dining table is set up, and the hardwood
floors get refinished.…
Your rank: _____________
THE KIDS ARE US COUPLE
Kids Are Us couples can’t wait to have children—usually
lots of children—and have a relationship that is often
focused on the children. They may have a “date night,” but
even this might be done with a view toward modeling a
good marriage—for the children. Homeschooling or
expensive private schooling may often be a priority for Kids

Are Us couples. This means an extra part of the budget,
space in the house, or time on the clock are spent focusing
on the kids. Even vacations may be chosen with
educational or family fun in mind.
You can love kids, enjoy kids, and even miss parenting
without being a Kids Are Us couple. But if you are truly a
Kids Are Us man who marries a woman who wants, at
most, two children, you will be sorely tried and deeply
disappointed with your life. If you’re a woman who dreams
of having three natural-born children and adopting another
three or four, and you’re marrying a man who might, at
most, be willing to put up with two of his own (biological)
children, you’re making a big mistake.
Your rank: _____________
BOHEMIAN BUDDIES
Do you envision Sunday mornings or early afternoons
taken up with reading through the New York Times,
checking out the latest indie movie, having an apartment
or house full of books, going to concerts, regular foreign
travel, and fulfilling (as opposed to lucrative) vocations?
That’s fine, unless you marry a person who is dedicated to

business, or devoted to ministry to the down-and-out, or
centered around the life of the local church. This is also
one of those lifestyles that usually precludes having lots of
kids. It’s one thing to raise ten kids on a farm or five kids
in the suburbs, but it’s a little more difficult to have a large
family while living in Manhattan or downtown Seattle.
A lot of Christians might think of “bohemian” in negative
terms (and yes, it’s possible to overdo it—every couple
should be involved in the local church), but the reality is,
there’s nothing wrong with wanting to be a redemptive
presence in the arts community. However, if you truly
aspire toward an arts-oriented lifestyle, you’ll be frustrated
hanging around with a guy or woman who puts Thomas
Kinkade prints on the walls and listens to exclusively
mainstream music. And this is one preference that really is
difficult to compromise on. A woman can join a book
discussion group if her husband doesn’t read, but what
about vacations? What about weekends and evenings? If
he just wants to read the Wall Street Journal and listen to
Fox News while she was hoping to check out a movie or
browse a used bookstore, neither partner is going to feel
much rest or intimacy on any given weekend or evening.
A quick warning here: in this section, in particular, I’m

throwing around a lot of stereotypes. It’s certainly possible
for someone to read the Wall Street Journal and still be
into the arts. This is intended to start a discussion, to get
at the core of who you are, not to put people into boxes.
The main point is to encourage you to consider who you
really are rather than base your marriage on an “ideal”
view of yourself that doesn’t really square with reality. It’s
also designed to help you push past the blindness inherent
in infatuation so that you can objectively evaluate whether
someone you’re crazy about is actually a good fit.
Even as a pastor, while I remain grateful for couples
devoted primarily to their kids, or those couples whose
lives seem to revolve around the local church (teaching
Bible study, volunteering for VBS, etc.), and those couples
whose financial success helps support the church, I also
thank God for those Christians who are active participants
in sometimes marginalized communities (like the arts) that
often get neglected by churches because the entire
community is written off as “worldly.” God so loved the
world that He sent His Son—isn’t it at least possible that,
in His Son’s name, He might also send some of His
children to the arts community? Do you want to be one of
those people? If so, admit it, and write the number 10 in

the blank below.
Your rank: _____________
POLICE PARTNERS
Some people find themselves energized by a police
arrangement— either they want to have somebody they
can keep checking up on, or they need somebody to keep
checking up on them. If one spouse is or was an addict,
the other spouse will regularly check the garbage for
bottles, the Internet history for sites visited, the bank
statements for sudden or unexplained withdrawals.
The thing is, some people feel most comfortable
fulfilling the role of a traffic cop, as it preoccupies their
attention and keeps them from having to think about their
own shortcomings. It gives them a sense of purpose, and
sometimes even feeling fear and suspicion is more
energizing than feeling bored or apathetic.
Other people like to be policed; it absolves them from
having to look after themselves. They’ll keep running into
trouble because their partner acts like a safety net, ready
to catch them so they don’t hit the ground too hard. They
may act like they resent the interference, but deep down,
they know they need it.

The problem with entering this kind of marriage is
considerable. First, if you’re the policeman or
policewoman, you’re assuming you don’t need someone to
hold you accountable. If you’re playing the criminal or
save-me role, you’re indulging your laziness by refusing to
love, look after, or serve someone else. That makes this
relationship character corrupting—reinforcing your
weaknesses—rather than character forming, building up
each other’s strengths.
When it comes to choosing a marriage partner, avoid
the messianic complex. There is only one Savior, and He
hasn’t been walking this earth for two millennia. Yet by
accepting a partner’s excuses or joining him in blaming
others, some people spur on a partner who perpetually
runs his life into the ground. There can be a sense of
satisfaction in thinking you’re the only one who really
understands her, and you’re the one she desperately
needs, because it can feel good to be needed. There’s
nothing wrong with wanting to help someone out; there is
something wrong with choosing an untrustworthy, crisis-
prone person to become your spouse.
Before you consider such a relationship, think about
something we’ll touch on in more detail later on in this

book: do you really want to raise kids with someone who
needs to be rescued from himself or herself? If you do
marry someone like that, you’re almost guaranteed to
become a de facto single parent. Is that truly the kind of
father or mother you want to give to your children?
I recently talked with a father who said his engaged
son was already “exhausted” with his fiancée’s clinical
mood swings. If that boy is exhausted now, in a dating
relationship, how tired do you think he’s going to be when
they have three kids and he has a full-time job? You’ve got
to think these issues through to their logical conclusion. If
a relationship is wearing you down even before you’re
carrying a mortgage, raising children, and shouldering
increased responsibilities, just try to imagine how you’ll
cope when other life pressures have increased as well.
Your rank__________
WARRIORS
Some people like to fight. It’s what they grew up with, it’s
how they process emotions, it’s what keeps life from being
so boring. And they may even think that makeup sex is the
best kind of sex.
Fighting releases adrenaline, and adrenaline can make

us feel more fully alive. But it’s a destructive way to stave
off boredom, and it’s a disastrous living arrangement in
which to raise children. If you can’t express what you
really feel about each other without using four-letter
words and hurtful comments, you lack the basic relational
skills necessary to build a satisfying marriage. Either
you’re not ready for marriage, or the person you’re with
isn’t capable of having an intimate marriage.
Fighting gets old. There will be seasons of life when
you need encouragement, forgiveness, and acceptance; a
marriage style defined by fighting usually lacks these
essential qualities. Marriage is tough enough without being
with someone who actually enjoys conflict. Conflict is an
inevitable and necessary part of every healthy, mature
relationship, but I wouldn’t want to be married to someone
who is energized primarily by altercations. I’d rather they
be energized by service, motivated by love, and moved by
compassion, kindness, and God’s gentle leading. What
about you?
Your rank: _____________
STUDENT-TEACHER

The name explains itself. One person likes to be taught;
one likes to teach. The most common form is the much
older, usually financially successful man marrying a
considerably younger woman (or, in the reverse form, the
“cougar” relationship). He thinks it’s “cute” that she is
enthralled by fancy restaurants she’s never been to
before, and when he explains the wine list to her in a way
that makes her look at him with awe, it makes him feel
like a man.
Women can get an ego rush having a younger man
chase after them, and for a while they may enjoy doing
“younger” things, reliving an earlier life. But if you’re
talking marriage and that’s the main attraction, how long
can you sustain that kind of bond? Keep in mind, your
“young” man won’t be so young in another decade.
Due warning: “students” eventually grow up and want
to be in a more mature relationship. Being a student is
okay for a while, but eventually you want to graduate from
school and build a life of relating. If the person you’re
married to won’t let you do that, resentment is inevitable.
You want to kill a sexual relationship? Sow the seeds of
resentment. It works every time.
These are short-term situations at best and usually

don’t make a healthy basis for a long-term marriage.
Your rank: _____________
TAKE YOUR PICK
Jennifer2 likes to go out several times a week; she’s a
social butterfly and feels like Bono when he sings, “I’ll go
crazy if I can’t go crazy tonight.”3 She’s married to Riley, a
guy who is into moving dirt (he develops properties for
contractors) and has a propensity for working long days
(ten to twelve hours is not uncommon for him once he
gets the heavy machinery up and going). The hard labor
makes him want to plop on the couch as soon as he gets
home, and when Jennifer mentions a party or restaurant
or friends getting together, Riley honestly feels that taking
a shower and standing on his feet is the last thing he
wants to do.
Neither Jennifer nor Riley are “right” or “wrong” in their
evening preference. Working hard is just what Riley does.
Needing to enjoy a good party now and then is part of
Jennifer’s DNA. Because Jennifer and Riley are married,
they have to compromise, but in all honesty it’s a constant
frustration to both of them. This is something to consider
before you get married.

Perhaps I’ve yet to describe your idealized marriage
style. That’s okay—you’re not abnormal—I’m just trying to
get the conversation going. Will you do yourself a favor? If
you’re in a serious relationship, set aside at least two, and
perhaps three, “talking” dates, just the two of you, at a
restaurant, a park, or anyplace you can talk without being
disturbed. Beforehand, take the time to write out a
description of your ideal marriage style. It might not be
one that I mentioned above. Describe with detailed
scenarios what sounds most exciting and rewarding to
you.
• How will you spend your evenings?
• How close will the two of you be?
• Will you try to spend every hour outside of
work together, or will you sometimes pursue
separate hobbies?
• How central will church involvement be in
your life?
• Will you take vacations with the kids,
without the kids, or even perhaps individually?
• When you’ve daydreamed about the most
satisfying moments of marriage, are you and

your loved one walking on a beach, scouring
antique stores, working on a mission field,
taking your children to the park, or doing
something else?
Labels aren’t nearly as important as how well your
assumptions about married life match up with those of the
person you’re thinking about marrying. How important is
any one particular snapshot to you? Is it mildly interesting,
very desirable, or absolutely essential? If it’s the latter,
and you’re thinking about marrying someone who is
antagonistic to that activity or style, don’t try to make
yourselves fit into each other’s lives. We find our
fulfillment in God alone; there are other people out there.
Have the courage to move on and be who God made you
to be. Yes, breaking up a dating relationship can be hard,
even excruciating. Breaking an engagement and calling off
a wedding can be even harder. No one wants to do that,
especially to someone they feel deeply for. But going
ahead with a wedding just because calling it off would be
hurtful is one of the most foolish things a person can do.
You are accepting a life sentence because you don’t want
to endure a difficult season.

Think about that: life sentence or difficult season.
That’s what you’re choosing between.
After your two or three personal dates, get together
with at least two other couples. Talk about marital styles.
Copy this chapter and have the other couples read it first,
and then get together for a group discussion. The reason
this next step is so important is that sometimes guys and
women are more likely to be honest when they see others
sharing their views. Guys might be shy telling their
girlfriend, “Yeah, I’m not so into the handyman thing,” but
when another guy says it and your guy laughs and says,
“You got that right,” a little moment of truth comes out.
When a woman says, “You know, I don’t really know if I
want to have children,” your girlfriend’s facial expression
in response will tell you a lot about what she really feels.
You might think I’m being way too obsessive about this,
but trust me: this is a big deal that few couples truly
consider. It’s worth setting aside three or four evenings
(out of your entire life, that’s not much!) to make sure
you’re a good fit. If you’re scared to do this, that means
you really need to do it.
Remember, your goal is to build a life together. If two
builders are trying to build two different houses on the

same foundation, that building is going to collapse. If your
dreams and your partner’s dreams do not fit together, in
an area that won’t change, with an issue that really does
matter to you, admit it. Be honest with yourself; be honest
with each other. What do you envision your marriage
looking like? Will you ever be able to have it with your
current partner? If not, take the courageous step of ending
the relationship and giving God a chance of leading you
toward someone who might be a better fit. In the end, it’s
the most loving thing you can do.
Remember, if there’s not “one right choice,” there is
likely a more compatible person out there with whom you
can share your life in a more fruitful and satisfying
manner. As painful as breaking off an engagement may
be, it is nowhere near as painful as breaking up a
marriage (or living in a miserable one).
STUDY QUESTIONS
1. What style of marriage best describes the kind of
marriage you’ve always imagined having?
2. How should a couple respond if the two of them feel
deeply in love but recognize that they envisage two very
different styles of marriage? How important do you think

agreement on marriage styles should be in deciding whom
to marry?
3. What differing styles would be most compatible? Which
ones would be most toxic if put together?
NOTES
1 Most of these titles are taken from a table in Robert Sternberg, “A Duplex
Theory of Love,” The New Psychology of Love, ed. Robert Sternberg
and Karin Weis (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2006), 192. But I’ve
added some and altered the meaning and wording of others for my
own purposes.
2 For purposes of privacy, and to keep me from losing all my friends, I’ve
made this a “composite” example based on real scenarios but with
personal identities carefully hidden.
3 U2, “I’ll Go Crazy If I Don’t Go Crazy Tonight,” No Line on the Horizon
© 2009 Mercury.

10
ARE YOU STRONG ENOUGH TO
BE MY (WO)MAN?
Nobody who wants to keep on living wakes up one
morning and suddenly decides, “I think I’ll climb Mount
Everest today.” Such a monumental assault requires
training, preparation, and gear.
Lots of gear.
In fact, experts suggest those who climb Mount Everest
should approach it with no fewer than three separate pairs
of boots: double plastic climbing boots, fully insulated
overboots, and light hiking boots. And yeah—you need
crampons, and certainly gaiters, and booties. Plus socks.
Wool socks, pile socks, synthetic socks. Lots of socks.
Tools help keep you alive, so don’t scrimp here—you’ll
want an ice ax, carabiners, ascenders, a rappel device, a
climbing harness, trekking poles.
To stay warm, you’ll need plenty of good underwear, a
pile jacket, pile pants, down pants, a down parka, a Gore-
Tex shell with a hood, and probably a bib. Along with your

sleeping bag you’ll need two different sleeping pads (and a
repair kit). Plan on two pairs of synthetic gloves and two
pairs of pile mitts or Gore-Tex overmitts. Hand warmers
are optional, but you won’t regret bringing them.
For your head you’ll want a baseball cap or some kind
of sun hat, at least a visor. At other times you’ll want a ski
hat that covers your ears. Get a heavy and a light
balaclava. Many climbers also like to use a neoprene face
mask, and make sure you include a headlamp (with plenty
of extra bulbs and batteries).
You’re still not done, though. Sun on snow equals a
blinding headache, so take two pairs of glacier sunglasses,
and don’t even think about anything less than 100 percent
UV protection. Also, ski goggles to go over the glasses.
And toilet paper. Please don’t forget the toilet paper.
Climbing Everest is a big deal. You need to be
prepared. The same is true for marriage. Just as you
wouldn’t try to scale a mountain without making sure you
have what you need, don’t enter the most difficult
relationship of your life without doing so. Life is not going
to be easy. Prepare for it to be really hard—twice as hard
as you think it’s going to be. If it ends up being less
difficult than you thought, there’s nothing lost having

married someone who could have weathered the storm
with you. If you plan on it being a picnic and marry
someone who is only good for the easy times, then you’re
going to be in serious trouble when times turn tough.
I don’t want to sound callous, but if a buddy of mine
who weighed 325 pounds and couldn’t walk a lap around
the track without having to stop for a rest offered to
accompany me on a trek up Everest, I’d decline. I’d have
to say, “Hey, I love you, and I’ll watch a movie with you or
take a walk around the park with you, but I’m not climbing
Everest with you.”
Some people may want to be married to you, but they
may not have what it takes. When you’re dating and in
love, it’s not that difficult to build and enjoy a relationship.
It doesn’t take someone of great character to accompany
you to movies and nice restaurants, to go on fun bike rides
or hikes or sit in a Starbucks or make out on a couch. Most
people can do that.
That’s not real life, however—at least, not for very
long. As a pastor, I’ve had to watch couples endure some
excruciating life crises. Is the person you’re thinking about
marrying capable of facing crises like the following?

MEDICAL MAELSTROMS
Ever hear of Angelman syndrome? I’ve met three families
who have given birth to children with this neurogenetic
disorder marked by severe intellectual and developmental
delays. Google it; watch some videos on YouTube. There
is no cure for this malady, meaning today’s parents will
have to take care of such a child for the rest of their lives.
Just last night I had dinner with a man whose daughter
was given a shot at the age of eighteen months; almost
overnight they saw a change and now are the parents of a
young woman fighting the effects of autism. They love
their daughter; God is doing great things in her life and in
their lives. But if this man had married a superficial
woman who was embarrassed by her girl’s lack of social
interaction instead of moved to compassion, the story
would be very different. A shockingly high percentage of
marriages with severely disabled children end in divorce,
because it’s not easy. There’s a temptation to expend so
much time, energy, and money caring for a disabled child
that some unwise parents allow their marriage to exist on
leftovers. Being physically exhausted, experiencing spiritual
confusion (when God doesn’t answer your prayers the way
you want Him to), dealing with interrupted sleep

schedules, having to give up hobbies or drive older cars to
pay for extra medical care—how would the person you’re
thinking about marrying hold up under this kind of stress?
They just might have to.
Darell had to wear a big tux when he got married, not
because he was fat but because he was a bodybuilder
who could bench-press four hundred pounds. You don’t fit
pecs like that into a 38R coat. His wife, Stacey, married a
physically fit man, the kind of man in whose arms she
could feel both lost and safe, covered and protected.
Just twenty-four months into their marriage, however,
Darell started experiencing some disconcerting symptoms
—numbness, vision issues, tremors. After some tests, the
news came as a shock: Darell had multiple sclerosis. He
fought off going into a scooter for as long as possible, but
his legs couldn’t carry him fully much past his forty-fifth
birthday. Friends, that leaves a lot of life, a lot of
marriage, to be lived. For most of their days together,
even though Stacey married a strong, bodybuilding
husband, she’s had to carry in the groceries and do most
of the heavy lifting.
Jake married an accomplished businesswoman, Grace,
who worked for a prestigious consulting firm. She had the

kind of job that sets you up vocationally for life. If you
wanted to get an MBA, they’d get you into Harvard or
Wharton. If you wanted to work for a nonprofit or another
company, they’d help you do that, too. If you wanted to
stay with them and slowly grow rich, well, by all means,
pull up a seat, get to work, and prepare to cash the
checks.
For a couple of years Grace earned more money than
Jake did, until an autoimmune disorder began to take over
her body and eventually left her bedridden for more than
six months. The company was generous—for a while.
Eventually, Jake and his wife and the company realized
Grace wasn’t coming back. Jake thought he was marrying
a woman who would more than double his income (but
that wasn’t why he married her, of course); now he’s
married to a woman who will need him to support her,
perhaps for the rest of her life.
You don’t know what the future holds, but you can
know the kind of character you’re marrying. The spiritual
capacity to hope, even in the face of seemingly
insurmountable obstacles, is an essential quality in life
—“Against all hope, Abraham in hope believed” (Rom.
4:18). Don’t minimize the importance of marrying

someone who is spiritually tough, who doesn’t grumble
and forget all about God at the first sign of trouble. Life is
usually full of trouble.
If you marry for money, health, or looks, keep in mind
that none of these are certain to remain. Character is the
surest thing. Even if the two of you manage to avoid a
medical maelstrom, the vast majority of you will have to
navigate something else that will test you to your core:
having children. Does the person you’re planning on
marrying have what it takes in this regard? Are they strong
enough not just to be your spouse, but to be your
children’s mom or dad?
YOUR KIDS’ PARENT
During an interview, a Hollywood actress didn’t rave to a
reporter about her husband’s wealth, looks, or reputation.
Instead, watching her husband on set with one of their
children, she said, “The one thing I can say I did a good
job on, I found a great man to father kids with. It’s like if I
didn’t do anything else right in this world, my kids got a
good doggone daddy.”1
Right now, your children are theoretical. When they
take on actual flesh and blood, you will experience

emotions and a capacity for sacrificial love that you never
even knew existed. You would be willing to swim across
the ocean in a lead coat in order to save them. The most
significant act of love, however, takes place before they’re
born. Before you agree to marry anyone, ask yourself, “Is
this the best mother/father I can find for my children?”
The time will come when, like this actress, you will be
more grateful than you can imagine, or more regretful
than you’ve ever been, because you have chosen for them
a wonderful or below-average parent.
For starters, what you’ll want more than anything else
is for those babies to be with you for all eternity. You’re
going to want them to become Christians. It won’t feel like
“want.” It’ll feel like “need.”
One mother approached me and asked me to speak
with her daughter, a young woman who claimed to be a
“seriously committed” Christian who was planning on
marrying a young man who declared himself an agnostic
and whose parents were Buddhists. I got right to the point.
“Do you want your future children to become
Christians?”
“More than anything,” the young woman replied.
“Then let me paint you a scenario. Your husband never

goes with you to church, but you take your boy every
week. When that boy turns eight, he asks his dad, ‘Dad,
why don’t you come to church with us?’ and Dad answers,
‘Son, I don’t believe that stuff. I think that stuff is for
women, mostly.’”
Pausing for full effect, I asked her, “Who do you think
that eight-year-old boy is going to feel pulled toward? Do
you think hearing a dad he idolizes talk down faith is
something that will help him grow toward God or get in
the way? And then when he spends the night at Grandpa
and Grandma’s house, and sees their Buddhist shrine, and
hears them talk about their faith, you’ve got a little kid who
sees one parent go to a Christian church, one parent talk
down faith altogether, and grandparents who practice an
entirely different religion. I don’t see how, if you want your
future kids to become Christians ‘more than anything else,’
this is the kind of marriage you’d consider.”
In addition to wanting your kids to know the one true
God, you’re also going to want them to be loved by both
parents. Not tolerated, not merely provided for, but
engaged with, loved, cherished. Watching your spouse
love on and play with your kids will move you like few
other things ever will. There may come a day when you

have a terrible argument with your spouse, but then, later
in the day, you watch him or her do something marvelous
for one of your kids, and your heart will immediately melt
with affection.
You’re not just choosing a life partner. You’re choosing
your kids’ future mom. You’re choosing your kids’ future
dad. Is this person worthy of that job? Does he or she
have what it takes?
Women, if you don’t want your boys to grow up to be
just like the guy you’re marrying, you’re looking at the
wrong man. Men, if you couldn’t tell your sons, “Find
someone exactly like your mom to marry,” then she’s not
the one for you. Your boyfriend or girlfriend isn’t just
applying to be your spouse; the job is much, much bigger
than that. Make sure they’re capable of being an
outstanding parent. Ask your friends; ask your family
members. Get some objective observations.
Sometimes singles contemplating marriage do think
about the kind of parent they’re choosing. It’s very rare,
however, that they consider the impact of grandparents,
but you should. Do your loved one’s parents have what it
takes to play a significant role in your future children’s
lives?

YOUR KIDS’ GRANDPARENTS
This one is a little tougher and not quite as absolute as the
previous category, but it’s still something to consider:
you’re not just choosing your kids’ future parent, you’re
choosing your kids’ future grandparents. If you want to
build a family of faith, it’s helpful to have a legacy to build
on. It’s a huge assist to have another couple who will
actively pray for your child and who will speak and act in
such a way that affirms what you’re trying to do at home
(this is especially the case if your own parents are
whacked-out). Your kids will see their grandparents share
your faith, treat each other a certain way, and talk about
others a certain way. That creates a stability and gives
them that much more of a foundation from which their
own faith can be conceived and nurtured.
In his book Stepping Up, Dennis Rainey tells the tear-
drenched story of how his daughter Rebecca and her
husband, Jake, gave birth to a little baby whose brain was
almost gone by the time she was born. Little Molly lived
just seven days, but in that one love-packed week, she
received abundant care, prayers, and comfort. Because
both Rebecca and Jake come from strong families, two
sets of grandparents were there, praying over little Molly,

reading Scripture to her, and singing songs of worship
along with her parents. Here’s how Dennis describes
Molly’s final moments on earth, when they all knew she
was about to die and planned their last good-byes:
Barbara was first. It was quite a maneuver to
make sure all the wires and tubes that were
supporting Molly’s life didn’t get tangled, but
finally there she was in her arms. Barbara
kept saying how much of an honor it was to
hold this little princess of the King. She held
her close and cooed words of love and
admiration over her beautiful face. Holding
back tears was impossible.
When it was Bill’s turn, he stroked her
face, tenderly whispered his love for her, and
shared his favorite scriptures with her. Pam
beamed as she gently rocked Molly and sang
“Jesus Loves Me” to her. Both Bill and Pam
just held her, kissing her face, holding her
little hands, and weeping as they said good-
bye.
As Molly was placed in my arms, she felt

so warm, just like every newborn. I tried to
sing to her, and I doubt that she recognized
“Jesus Loves Me” as I choked out a few words
through tears.2
As his own kids were growing up, Dennis used to tell
stories of a fantasyland filled with “Speck people.” Dennis
always got one of the Speck people into a harrowing
dilemma and then said, “And you’ll have to wait until
tomorrow night to hear the rest of the story.” He now
frequently told these stories to his grandchildren, so Jake
asked his father-in-law, Molly’s grandfather, to tell her one
Speck story before she died.
At first, Dennis protested—he just couldn’t. But Jake
and Rebecca implored him, which led to this:
I held little Molly, looked into her face, and
began my story: “A Speck grandfather and his
Speck granddaughter went fishing for tiny
Speck fish.…” My story was less than sixty
seconds long, and when I looked up into
Rebecca’s face, she had the biggest grin,
dimples and all. She was loving the moment.
As I concluded my story, I told Molly, “The

Speck grandfather and granddaughter took
their fish and ate them, and then they
encountered something you would never
expect or believe … and you will have to wait
until I get to heaven to hear the rest of the
story.”
At this point I was sobbing, but I got the
words out … and Rebecca and Jake started
laughing. Rebecca’s laughter has always been
contagious, and I, too, began to really laugh.3
Losing a child is one of the most painful experiences
any human can ever know. But the corporate love of four
faith-filled grandparents allowed this young mom and dad
to actually find laughter and hope in the face of one of
life’s ugliest realities.
It gets even better: with all the laughter in the room,
little Molly’s oxygen monitor, which had been at an anemic
80 percent, shot up to 92 percent, then 94, 97, 98, 99, and
then, finally, 100. That tiny newborn drank in the faith and
hope and laughter of her parents and grandparents.
Though this was ultimately her last day on earth, I don’t
doubt that she died knowing she was very loved, and she

is no doubt eagerly waiting in heaven to greet first her
grandparents, and then her parents, who gave her such a
sweet and blessed passing.
You have a chance—one opportunity—to choose such a
legacy for yourself and for your children.
That’s the positive view. On the negative end, if there
are dangerous issues in your boyfriend’s or girlfriend’s
prior generations, be very cautious. Child abuse, sexual
deviancy, psychological problems, and addictions not only
will make your potential spouse more vulnerable as he or
she ages (some of these problems take a while—until a
person is in his or her midthirties—to sprout) but can also
be passed down, in some sense, to your kids. I’m not
saying it’s always direct, but the statistical evidence is
pretty frightening.
A Facebook friend who has been through three
divorces sent this message to me: “What I didn’t know
when I met or married this guy [husband number three]
was that there was a family history of mental illness. You
just don’t think to ask, ‘So, has anyone in your family ever
had a lobotomy?? Really?? Two of your uncles?? And one
nearly killed his wife and kids?? Really??’ There are
mentally ill people, male and female, who are capable of

becoming/saying/doing anything they think will help them
accomplish a goal. This guy I married was physically and
sexually abusive.… He was a Jekyll/Hyde, a liar/deceiver,
and I didn’t recognize the wolf in sheep’s clothing.”
My friend had already been through two divorces. You
might think she would be extra cautious about husband
number three. But the heart, when it’s engaged, can shut
down the mind and resist any sense of caution. She would
be the first to tell you to thoroughly do your homework in
checking out those delicate issues buried in a potential
spouse’s family history.
Never forget: you’re building a family. To make a wise
investment, you need to consider the other “partners.” Is
your spouse so strong in every other area that you’re
willing to take a risk here even if he or she has a weak
extended family? Or does your potential spouse barely
qualify on his or her own and have a nightmare extended
family as well? If the latter is the case, you might try to do
a little better.
For those of you considering remarriage, and especially
those of you who have kids, if your potential spouse keeps
telling you what a nut job their ex-spouse is, ask yourself
as a parent, “Do I want to bring my kids into that kind of

situation?”
This might sound harsh, but look at it this way. If three
people applied to babysit my kids, the mere fact that they
all wanted a job wouldn’t be what I based my choice on.
I’d hire the babysitter who seemed most stable, safe,
qualified, and competent. That’s not being selfish or
judgmental; it’s being wise, responsible, and protective of
my kids.
You get to start protecting your kids before they’re even
born. Give them a godly mom or dad. Even better, raise
them in a godly family with lots of spiritual support. Most
young people completely discount this. I think it should be
much more of a factor in your final decision than many
people make it.
A HUMBLE SPIRITUALITY
If the person you love knows you’re a Christian and says
he or she’s a Christian too, that means almost nothing. In
one sense, it means a lot, in that if they categorically say
they’re not a believer, you have no business marrying
them. However, I hope you want more than just someone
who simply says he or she’s a Christian. Consider
marrying a certain kind of Christian, one with a humble

spirituality.
Does your Christian pray? Not just in church and not
just with you, but on his or her own? If not, you’ll walk
through life without the person who knows you most lifting
you up in prayerful support. You’ll be the only one
supporting your kids in prayer. You’ll be married to
someone who isn’t opening themselves up to God’s
conviction, encouragement, and support. If your spouse
gets depressed, you’ll have to lift that person up on your
own, since he or she won’t know how to go to God. If you
get depressed, you’ll have to find another friend to
prayerfully support you because your spouse won’t know
how to. If your husband or wife develops bad attitudes
toward you or cultivates sinful habits, and isn’t spending
time in prayer to be convicted by God, those attitudes and
habits will grow stronger and possibly threaten your
marriage.
Is your potential future spouse a student of the Bible?
Humble Christians know they have a lot to learn. If you
marry a man or woman who opens his or her Bible only
when the pastor is reading the text, you’re marrying
someone whose spiritual growth will be negligible. That
person won’t be growing in wisdom. She won’t have

Scripture on her mind to encourage you or spiritually feed
your children. He’ll be set in his own prejudices and faulty
thinking without being washed by the Word. A spouse like
this will never be spiritually wiser than he or she already
is.
Finally, by “humble” spirituality I mean, does your
Christian understand he or she is not perfect and needs to
grow? Does that person resent it when you notice his or
her anger, lust, selfishness, or does he or she recognize
that while God is working on them, there is always room
for more growth? If people don’t understand God’s grace,
they will get defensive rather than listen. If they don’t
understand God’s grace, they will never be empowered to
rise above an ineffective perfectionism that leads to
legalism and denial. You will be married to someone who
spends all of his or her energy covering up and making
excuses instead of repenting and changing. Worse, you’ll
be married to someone who doesn’t even think he or she
needs to change (which means, by extension, that your
spouse will think you’re the one who is always in the
wrong).
Let me say a word to the women here: at least 90
percent of the change in my marriage has come through

God convicting me in prayer and Bible study. Less than 10
percent has come about from my wife confronting me or
talking to me. I study marriage for a living. I’ve written
over half a dozen marriage-related books (some with
others) and speak on marriage twenty weekends a year. I
try really hard to understand marriage and to serve my
wife. But if God wasn’t an active force in my life, a daily
presence, I’d fear for my wife’s security, happiness, and
even sanity. I’d drive her crazy with my selfishness,
weakness, sin, and pride. Though I have miles of
improvement ahead of me, God is continually making me
into a much better husband than I’d be otherwise. God is
doing this, not me. Can I suggest that this is something
you want in your husband as well? He might be a great
guy, but for my daughters I’d take an average guy who is
growing in God over a great guy who is spiritually stagnant
any day, because it’s only a matter of time until that
average guy starts treating his wife like gold and the great
guy becomes a little less so. It’s one thing for selfishness
to mark a twenty-five-year-old husband; it’s particularly
sad when a fifty-year-old husband shows the same trait.
So, to sum it all up: the man or woman you’re thinking
of marrying should be someone whose character can

survive major life challenges. Your potential future spouse
should be the best parent you can find for your kids and
ideally bring along some spiritually beneficial grandparents
as well. And he or she should be steeped in a humble
spirituality, a deep desire to drink from God’s well and
grow in Christ throughout the rest of his or her life.
Before you breathe a sigh of relief, however, realize
that we’re just getting started. We’ve mentioned some
character issues in this chapter; in the next, we’re going to
talk about some necessary skills. Someone could be
“strong enough” to be your man or woman but still lack
the competence and capability of being an excellent
husband or wife.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1. How difficult do you expect marriage to be? On a scale
of 1 to 10 (1 = always easy, if you’re truly in love; 10 = a
difficult challenge every day) what do you expect to face?
2. How do you think a person’s perception of the difficulty
of marriage will influence who they marry?
3. Would you consider marrying someone you felt deeply
in love with, even if you don’t think they’re very mature or
if they lack basic relational skills? Where do you draw the

line—how mature must someone be (relationally) in order
for you to feel comfortable marrying them?
4. Have you known any families or couples that had to
endure serious medical difficulties? From what you’ve
observed, what did that do to their relationship? How
might what you observed affect the qualities of the person
you’re looking for to marry?
5. Would you be willing to marry someone who makes you
laugh, who you enjoy being around, and who you are
sexually attracted to, even if you’re not sure they’d be a
good parent? Why or why not?
6. How can you tell ahead of time how good a parent
someone might be?
7. Describe the ideal grandparents for your future children.
How important does giving your children grandparents like
this seem to you?
NOTES
1 “Making Screen Magic Is in the Family Script,” USA Today, June 12,
2011, www.usatoday.com/LIFE/usaedition/2011-06-13-Jada-Pinkett-
sidebar_ST_U.htm.
2 Dennis Rainey, Stepping Up: A Call to Courageous Manhood (Little
Rock, AR: FamilyLife Publishing, 2011), 13–14.
3 Rainey, 14.

11
MAKING A MARRIAGE
Most Hollywood romances focus on finding “the one.” A
common plot point, early in the movie, is to have two
individuals, destined to be together, almost meet. They’ll
walk right past each other, perhaps even glance and smile
as they pass, enter and exit the same room, bus, or café
just seconds apart, or they’ll be on opposite sides of the
same park as the camera hovers overhead. If only she
would walk that way, she’d run into him; if only he had
turned his head one second sooner …
Since the actors are the two best-looking people on the
set, you know they will meet eventually, but it creates a
little tension to put it off for a while.
This romantic mind-set is based on the false and
harmful notion that a good relationship is something you
find, when in fact it is something you make. Infatuation is
something you find. Sexual chemistry is something you
find. A lost cell phone is something you find. But a strong,
intimate, God-honoring marriage that leads to a lifelong
partnership and that fosters a sense of oneness? That’s

something you make, and it takes a long time to make.
I want to say this again, because if you’ll accept this
premise, it’ll go a long way toward helping you make a
wise marital choice: a good marriage isn’t something you
find, it’s something you make.
A relationship, by its very definition, can’t be found; it
has to be built. It requires two people getting to know
each other, and then every day they have to choose to
keep relating to each other or risk drifting apart. Intimacy
is created stitch by stitch, through verbal sharing,
dedicated praying, acts of love and service, expressions of
commitment, and building increased understanding
through regular communication and by experiencing life
together.
In fact, one study suggests that it takes from nine to
fourteen years—at least a decade, and sometimes a
decade and a half—for two individuals to stop thinking of
themselves as individuals and to start thinking of
themselves as a couple. That’s right—the journey from
“me” to “we” takes years to achieve. That’s due in part to
the way our brains are wired. In a very real sense, we
shape our brains with our lifestyle; the things we do and
the habits we choose create neural pathways that become

our new norm. That’s how addictions are built; that’s why
habits can be so difficult to break.
Put it this way: have you ever driven home from work
or church, pulled into your driveway, and realized you
didn’t make a single conscious decision the entire drive
home? That you were essentially on autopilot? That’s
neuroplasticity in action. Your brain has become so
familiar with that route that once you start out on it, habit
takes over. You almost stop seeing the journey as
individual turns and instead process it as one basic
decision: go home.
Relationally, if you’ve been living as a single for twenty
to thirty years and then get married, your brain doesn’t
immediately turn into “Okay, I’m married now; I have to
think like a married brain, act like a married brain, stop
putting up the defenses of a single brain, and embrace the
intimacy of a married brain.” Those patterns of relating
that served you as a single must be dismantled. You have
to consciously adopt new forms of thinking and learn how
to understand, serve, forgive, be vulnerable, move toward
someone rather than away even in the face of hurt, and
drop your former defenses. You are no longer evaluating
this person; you are dedicated to sacrificially loving them.

It takes time for you to make such a monumental cognitive
shift. To reach true intimacy and that sense of oneness
that we all desire requires two things: the initial death of
infatuation (which doesn’t recognize reality and therefore
can’t serve true intimacy) and at least nine to ten years of
practice, faithfully moving toward each other relationally.
Neurologically, a relationship can be built, and it can be
systematically torn apart or die of neglect, but it is not
“found” or “lost.”
With this being true, when it comes to choosing
someone to marry, it is imperative that you choose
someone who is both capable and willing to “climb Mount
Everest,” to make a marriage with you. I stress the word
both because while some might be willing, they may not
be capable. Others might be capable but not willing. You
want to find someone who can and will do both. If not,
they are the wrong person for you.
HOW TO MAKE THE MARRIAGE
The following characteristics are essential to make a
marriage. You can’t expect a twenty-two-year-old to
possess all of them in their full mature form, but you
should see the foundations of these elements. The degree

to which they are not present is the degree to which you’ll
have difficulty building intimacy with this person and the
degree to which you’re going to struggle in the early years
of marriage.
IS HUMBLE
A quick definition: humility is not thinking less of yourself,
it is thinking less about yourself. It is someone who, like
Jesus, believes he has come “not to be served, but to
serve.” Jesus knew His talents, and He knew His deity, but
He used His power to serve. Unlike Jesus (since we are
not perfect, and He was), a humble person is someone
who has experienced and is experiencing conviction of sin:
they are aware that they fall short, every day, and that
they have much to work on, and biblical grace is the only
place they put their hope.
The only thing worse than marrying an imperfect
person is marrying an imperfect person who thinks he or
she is perfect. When you lovingly confront them, they’ll
take offense. Or, horrified that they’ve been found out,
they’ll minimize the issue with silly games: “I’m just a
horrible, horrible wife.” No, you’re a good wife who has a
sinful issue that needs attention. The reason I call this a

“game” is that unparticular repentance is a clever way to
avoid particular conviction. Saying “everything about me is
rotten” helps us sidestep the fact that some parts of us are
more rotten than others.
While theologically it is true that “all our righteous acts
are filthy rags,” that doesn’t mean we don’t have some
strengths and weaknesses. A wise person knows he might
excel at giving but lack patience, or excel in patience while
lacking courage. The key is to accept that there will always
be weaknesses in our lives and, with a spirit of willingness
and appreciation, to learn to value a spouse who wants to
help us make every effort to add to our faith (2 Pet. 1:5–
7).
Humility matters more than money and appearance, as
it is the character foundation of growth and godliness. You
can always earn more money, lose a little weight, and
gain a bit more muscle, but if someone’s character has no
foundation, there’s nothing to build on. Humility is the
cornerstone of character and the foundation of a growing,
intimate relationship. I don’t believe it is possible for a
highly arrogant person to be intimately connected with
someone. Arrogant people use people; they don’t love
them. Besides, the Bible says no less than three times:

“God opposes the proud but gives grace to the humble.”
Do you want to marry someone who is at war with God, or
someone who is walking in His grace?
A humble person:
• Lives with biblical conviction of our overall
sin nature as well as particular sins.
• Lives out of the gospel—that we are
helpless to save or even change ourselves,
apart from the work of Christ and the
empowerment of the Holy Spirit.
• Is open to receiving appropriate correction
and eager to take action when faults are
pointed out.
• Lives authentically—is concerned with
growing in righteousness rather than merely
appearing righteous.
• Aspires to excel in being a servant.
When she gets into an argument, a humble person
considers the fact that she may be wrong and that there
may be something she has missed or is overlooking. She
is more concerned with walking in light and truth than with
being right. Aware of his spiritual poverty, a humble

person prays and studies and confesses and asks people
to hold him accountable, as he knows he is a work in
progress.
IS ABLE TO FORGIVE
If you believe the Bible, you are going to stumble many
times throughout your marriage (James 3:2). You will
break your spouse’s heart. You will disappoint her. You will
embarrass him. Your sin will inconvenience her.
A couple I was pastorally counseling needed to work on
building some relational intimacy. The guy confessed that
he didn’t want to fully open up to his fiancée about the
stress in his life because he didn’t want to be a burden to
her. I told him that if his goal is to never be a burden to
his future wife, he shouldn’t marry her; he might as well
break up with her right now. There was, quite
understandably, visible shock on his face until I explained,
“What if you get laid off and can’t find another job and she
has to double her hours? What if you get a stroke and she
has to hand-feed you? What if you make a really stupid
investment or a dumb mistake and get fired or have your
portfolio tank? One or all of those things will happen over
the course of your marriage. You are going to hurt and

disappoint this woman very deeply, so you might as well
learn how to do it productively.”
It’s hard to accept that we are going to hurt someone
we love so much, but if we marry them, we will. That’s a
biblical promise. Which means forgiveness is absolutely
essential. I have seen married couples survive affairs,
catastrophic illnesses, financial meltdowns, and tragedies
that would make you pass out—but the one thing I have
never seen a marriage survive is a persistent
unwillingness to forgive.
How do you know the person you love is capable of
forgiving? First, that person recognizes his or her own
need for forgiveness, understands God’s love and
acceptance, and not only believes the gospel but has it
woven into every fiber of his or her being: we are all
sinners saved by grace who depend on God’s mercy and
initiating grace every hour of our lives.
Can I be honest with you? If your boyfriend or girlfriend
is having a difficult time forgiving you for things you’ve
done while dating, marriage is going to be even harder.
When you live together and raise a family together, sins
become more apparent, more common, and more
consequential. If that person can’t forgive you now, he or

she will never be able to forgive you then.
Forgiveness does not mean the removal of
consequences, of course. Women, if your guy cheats on
you, you need to forgive him—and most likely, break up
with him. If he hits you, even once—you will have to work
toward forgiveness, but I pray you will end the dating
relationship right there (more on this in a moment) and
perhaps even turn him in to the police.
In addressing forgiveness, I’m talking about the kinds of
sins that don’t speak of a questionable character but
rather of a person in progress who needs common grace.
Dating is different from marriage—it is appropriate to
evaluate your commitment and the person’s worthiness,
as their character reveals itself. Once you are married,
you have to look at these things differently, but until you
are married, evaluation is essential.
HANDLES CONFLICT IN A HEALTHY WAY
Because both of you stumble in many ways, you need
someone who can not only forgive but can work through
conflict in a healthy way. There will be conflict. The only
question is, will you grow toward each other as a result of
the conflict, or will your hearts grow ever colder because

you avoid the issue or because you respond to conflict in
hurtful ways?
Unhealthy conflict resolution includes the silent
treatment or stonewalling—a pathetic, passive-aggressive
refusal to act like a person in a relationship. Also
unhealthy is any form of violence—threats, yelling, and any
physical violence.
Women, I’m pretty legalistic on this one, but let me lay
this out: when it comes to physical abuse in dating, my
suggested rule is, one strike and he’s out. He doesn’t get a
second chance. If he’s a little too angry for you when
you’re dating, he will become much too angry when you’re
married. A man who expresses anger with physical
violence is on a pathway toward family destruction. Do you
really want to make babies with a guy who will get angry
at them and then hit them? Do you want to sleep naked
next to a man who might do you bodily harm? Do you want
to take showers in a house when he could walk in at any
moment and hurt you when you are in a completely
defenseless state? Do you want to argue with a man in a
kitchen and worry about the fact that there is a block of
knives two feet away from where he’s yelling at you? Do
you want to drive in an SUV with a guy who can’t control

his temper and may run both of you into a head-on
accident (while your children are riding in the backseat)?
Some may accuse me of being too unyielding on this,
but I believe that if a boyfriend hits you, that’s all you need
to know. He’s not right for you. That’s not the kind of guy
you want to marry. Many, many women have ignored
evidence of “a little” violence in their boyfriend and have
lived to regret it. That’s why I think that if there’s any
violence, you end the relationship right there (and of
course, this goes for men dating violent women as well).
Assume he’s on his best behavior while trying to win you
over. If he can’t keep things under control while you’re
dating, he’ll never be able to handle himself being around
you every day. Don’t do this to yourself, don’t do this to
your future children, don’t do this to him!
The best thing that could happen for an abuser would
be for him to lose someone he really loves due to his
acting out. That might force him to seek help and to learn
healthier ways of relating. If you make an “exception” just
this once, you are training him to expect women “who
really love him” to give him a hall pass when it comes to
violence. He needs to learn that physical violence is a
completely unacceptable way of solving conflict with a

woman, particularly with his wife.
If your husband’s strength threatens you instead of
comforts you, you will never have a life of true intimacy
with him. Don’t marry that guy.
A woman once told me I’m too black-and-white on this,
but before you agree with her, consider this: if out of
romantic silliness you ignore signs of a man’s violence, you
may one day have to tell your kids, “I’m sorry that I chose
a dad for you who scares you. I’m sorry you’ve seen your
mother threatened, maybe even hit. I’m sorry we all feel a
little bit safer when your dad is gone, and a little nervous
whenever he comes home. However, the infatuation I felt
for him was so strong, I think, all in all, it’s been worth it.”
Another form of unhealthy conflict resolution is to talk
about your partner before you talk to your partner. There
is nothing wrong with seeking godly input in appropriate
fashion. There is something wrong with complaining about
your partner to your friends or family members in a
nonredemptive way. That’s called gossip. If you haven’t
talked about it to your partner, you have no business
talking about it to someone else, unless it’s a particularly
touchy issue and you’re seeking godly wisdom as to how
to share it or broach the topic. Talking about conflict with

others should never be a substitute for talking with your
spouse; it merely prepares you to talk to your spouse.
Healthy conflict resolution, on the other hand, means a
person can admit where he or she is wrong. Even if
someone is only 10 percent wrong, that person can own
the 10 percent. But it is not healthy to confess wrongdoing
when there is no wrongdoing to confess. Some people will
say “sorry” when there is nothing to be sorry for, just to
bring about peace. That’s not healthy, and it’s not biblical.
You want to find someone humble enough to admit
personal failings, wise enough to recognize yours, and
courageous enough to hold his or her ground if you are
acting arrogantly and refusing to see your sin.
Finally, people who resolve conflict in a healthy way will
be willing to seek a third opinion in the face of stalemate.
There will be times in your marriage when the two of you
cannot come to complete agreement, and you may need
to find a godly pastor or counselor to hear both of you out
and provide wise counsel. I would be hesitant to marry
anyone who wouldn’t agree, going in, to use counseling
when necessary, for the simple fact that it will be
necessary. I wouldn’t marry a woman who was afraid to
visit the doctor, because I know her body will eventually

get sick and need medical attention. Likewise, I wouldn’t
marry a woman who was afraid to seek a relational
doctor, because I know there will be moments when our
marriage will get sick and need outside attention.
Entering a new marriage is like buying a new car: it
runs fine for a while. But eventually that shiny new car is
going to need a mechanic. If you’re marrying someone
who resents mechanics or who is afraid of mechanics or
who is threatened by mechanics, you’d better get used to
walking, because your car is going to be broken for a
really long time.
COMMUNICATES
Intimacy is built through sharing, listening, understanding,
and talking through issues. If someone doesn’t like to talk,
refuses to talk, or resents your desire to talk, intimacy
building is going to hit a stone wall. In most relationships,
the woman will desire to talk more than the man, so
women shouldn’t freak out if their boyfriends don’t seem
as excited about this aspect of relational building as they
are. But, women, if he isn’t growing in his desire to share
his heart with you, if he is doing it only to please you, if it
feels like a chore to him to get to know you, if he can’t or

won’t ask you a question about yourself—he lacks the
basic relational skills to build an intimate marriage.
The general rule is this: however much your boyfriend
talks to you while dating, cut that down by at least 25
percent after marriage. If you’re not good with that, you’re
looking at the wrong guy. I’m not saying it should be that
way, only that it almost always is. Talk to married women;
ask them if this isn’t true. Make your choice accordingly.
PRAYS
Why would anyone want to be married without having God
as a partner? I can’t imagine facing the challenges of
marriage without the hope of God to lift my eyes when I’m
discouraged and the conviction of God to open my eyes
when I’m blind to my own sin. Since marriage is
something you make, and since marriage is going to be
difficult, I’d want to marry someone who knows how to
pray, who practices prayer, and who is growing in prayer.
A woman once told my wife and me that she feels so
much safer when she knows her husband is praying and in
the Word. She doesn’t have to ask him if he’s doing this—
she can tell by his attitude, his actions, the tone of his
voice, his overall demeanor. And knowing that he is

regularly connecting with God gives her a peace and
security that she treasures.
MAKES AND KEEPS FRIENDS
Does your future spouse have friends? Not acquaintances,
but true friends? If someone is twenty-eight years old and
doesn’t really have many or even any close connections,
that’s a signal that person may not be very skilled at
building intimate friendships. What makes you think it will
be any different with you? At the very least, you need to
know you will have to do much of the work to turn this
marriage into a friendship, and you’re assuming your
boyfriend or girlfriend is going to be willing and/or capable
of responding in an intimate way. It’s always dangerous to
assume someone can or will change. Your best bet to
make a marriage is to find someone who already knows
how to make and keep friends.
MAKE THE CALL
Okay, now you know some of the basic requirements to
build a marriage. If you’re in a relationship that appears
headed toward marriage, here’s a simple test. On a
separate piece of paper, rank your potential spouse on a

scale of 1 to 10 in each area. This person:
is humble. _____
is forgiving. _____
resolves conflict in a healthy way. _____
knows how to communicate. _____
prays. _____
is skilled in the art of friendship. _____
If your total score isn’t a forty-five or higher, I think you
need to talk this list through with a pastor, trusted older
friend, or counselor to see if the person you’re thinking
about marrying is going to be capable of building the kind
of marriage you desire. If the person you are thinking
about marrying lacks the basic skills required to make a
marriage, the death of infatuation is going to hit you
particularly hard. You won’t have a partner who can
respond to this necessary life moment by slowly building
relational intimacy on a day-by-day basis. You know what
that means? Let me put it bluntly: get ready to live a lonely
life. You will be able to cope for a while, by sharing the
task of raising children together and then by pursuing
same-gender friendships so you have someone to talk to
now and then. But know this: eventually those children will

grow up and leave the house. Some of those friends will
move away. And you’re going to be facing another thirty
years of marriage to a person who isn’t capable of relating
to you on a meaningful level.
It all comes down to this: if relational intimacy matters
to you, make sure you marry someone who has the basic
skills to build such a relationship, as well as the motivation
to keep on doing so. Once the infatuation ends, relational
skills are essential to take your marriage to the next level.
This sounds rather elementary, but it’s often ignored in the
fog of infatuation.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Had you ever thought of this before: “A good marriage
isn’t something you find; it’s something you make”? Do you
think it’s true? Why or why not?
2. People often consider whether they feel attracted to
each other physically, while ignoring things like the
person’s level of humility. How would you balance your
value of a person’s physical attractiveness with their level
of spiritual humility?
3. Have you ever asked someone to forgive you? What
was that experience like? Was that reaction something

similar to what you hope to experience in marriage or
something very different?
4. Does conflict scare you? What characteristics should a
future mate have in order for a couple to grow through
conflict, instead of being crushed by it?
5. Do you agree that any serious act of violence should
end a dating relationship? Why or why not? What
constitutes “serious” in your mind?
6. How important do you think regular communication will
be for you to fully enjoy your marriage and feel connected
to your spouse? How can you tell if someone will
communicate after the infatuation ends?
7. Rank these qualities in order of their importance to you
when considering someone to marry:
• ___ Is Humble
• ___ Is Forgiving
• ___ Resolves conflict in a healthy way
• ___ Knows how to communicate
• ___ Prays
• ___ Is skilled in the art of friendship

12
SOMETHING YOU MUST AGREE ABOUT
One of the saddest scenes my wife and I have ever seen
took place at a resort wedding. We weren’t invited; we
were merely spectators. But the context was as obvious as
it was painful.
We were in Cabo, Mexico, on the Sea of Cortez. An
hour or two before sunset, workers began scooping out a
large heart shape in the sand, set up a table next to it, and
surrounded the heart with lights. They sprinkled the heart
with rose petals, and a little while later a middle-aged
woman (we’re thinking this was a second wedding)
walked down the walkway, alone, toward a solo man
standing in the heart.
There were no witnesses except for another tourist
couple who had been asked to fill in. Their casual dress
contrasted with the beautiful white dress of the bride and
the white clothes of the groom as they stood facing the
ocean. The sun was setting, the private table for two
looked enchanting—it all seemed so romantic.
Two hours later, Lisa and I saw the bride, still in her

dress, still carrying her flowers, walking alone. It seemed
odd. She had gotten married about 120 minutes ago; why
wasn’t she with her new husband? Maybe she had
something she just needed to pick up.
We said “congratulations.” She smiled and moved on.
We walked around the grounds some more and saw
the bride again about forty-five minutes later, walking
down another hall, still alone, still in her dress, still
carrying her flowers. This time, there was no smile. The
tightness around her lips, the tension in her neck, the grip
on her flowers gave it all away.
She couldn’t find her husband.
This marriage was less than twenty-four hours old, and
already someone wasn’t acting like a husband.
Maybe there was an innocent explanation, a simple
misunderstanding, but clearly this bride was a little
embarrassed and more than a little frustrated.
How do you expect your spouse to act, not just on your
wedding day, but throughout your marriage? One issue
I’ve noticed that fewer couples address today concerns
gender roles. Women, do you expect your husband to “act
like a man,” or does that very phrase offend you?
For your grandparents there was little, if any,

disagreement on gender roles, but it’s now become
controversial. The problem is, while gender roles within
church and marriage are discussed thoroughly in
seminaries, few dating couples are aware of this issue and
fewer still discuss it. In fact, the younger generation (I
realize that many of you reading this may be as old as I
am) has been brought up to treat gender distinction with
the same disgust as racial discrimination. While I have my
own opinions on this matter, what’s probably even more
important than whether you agree with me is whether you
agree with each other on where you stand. If you disagree
on this issue, I think it’s a deal-breaker.
One of the top complaints I hear from thirty-and
fortysomething wives is that their husbands aren’t acting
as “spiritual leaders,” but some now question that very
concept as inappropriate. Different views of gender roles
are based on what theologians call “egalitarian” or
“complementarian” views of marriage.
In general, the egalitarian viewpoint sees no such thing
as gender roles in marriage. In this view, God doesn’t call
men to servant leadership; that’s cultural conditioning
more than it is scriptural. Every couple should make their
own decisions about who does what best, divide up the

responsibilities, and base their marriage on individual
strengths and weaknesses. The husband isn’t expected to
be a leader but rather a fifty-fifty partner. The thought of
him leading is, in itself, somewhat offensive and
demeaning to his wife. Nobody has the final say, and
neither partner has more responsibility than the other to
provide, guide, and protect. Every verse that seems to
suggest men have a leadership role at home or in the
church can be explained away by context, later additions
to the original manuscripts, a more refined study of the
original language, or a “trajectory” view of Scripture that
suggests the New Testament realized the first century
wasn’t ready for egalitarianism, so it simply laid the
foundation for it in future generations. The fact that the
church used to think that men needed to step up as
leaders at home and in the church is a historical weakness
that needs to be discarded and explained away, not a
biblical truth to be applied today.
In the complementarian viewpoint, God has given the
husband a role of loving servant leadership. Reasonable
complementarians believe that the Bible describes this role
more as one of responsibility than privilege, however. The
husband essentially becomes a living martyr in his

commitment to and service for his wife (Eph. 5:25–33),
and she becomes his helper. Part of the man’s martyrdom
is lovingly leading her. This is what many—myself included
—believe the Bible teaches in Genesis 3:16, 1 Corinthians
11:3, Ephesians 5:22–32, Colossians 3:18–19, and 1
Timothy 2:12–14, among other passages, taken together
and applied throughout the majority of the church’s history
until the previous generation or so.
This is a matter of scriptural interpretation, but as a
side benefit, I believe that the complementarian view
seems to square better with recent findings in
neuroscience about how the male and female brains work,
as well as what makes for successful relationships. I
frankly think the Bible is pretty clear on this, though there
are a growing number of scholars (which, in fairness, I do
not claim to be) who disagree with me.
This isn’t the place to convince you of the rightness or
wrongness of either position. If you want to study it for
yourself, just google “Wayne Grudem” for the
complementarian perspective and “Gordon Fee” for the
egalitarian one, and you’ll get more than enough
information.
As I said before, what matters more than whether you

agree with me, Wayne Grudem, or Gordon Fee is whether
you agree with each other. Here’s why.
WHY YOU NEED TO MARRY SOMEONE WHO
AGREES WITH YOU ON THIS
The problems with disagreement on this issue may not be
what you think. Many wives in complementarian marriages
still manage finances. Many such husbands do much or
even all of the cooking, just as many egalitarian husbands
can be strong leaders. This debate often gets muddled by
superficial, nonbiblical issues that aren’t concrete or even
helpful. It’s often sidetracked with silly stereotypes—as if
all complementarian men are abusive chauvinist pigs and
all egalitarian men are spineless effeminate liberals. The
last thing I’d call Wayne Grudem is abusive (the guy left a
prime teaching position at a prestigious school to go to a
then no-name college in order to serve his wife’s physical
health). I’ve been a teaching assistant for Gordon Fee, and
he is, I assure you, neither spineless nor effeminate nor
wishy-washy when it comes to biblical authority.
Most of the common misconceptions about gender
roles aren’t at a biblical level. Who handles finances, who
cleans and cooks, who chooses where to go on vacation,

or even what will constitute 99.9 percent of the general
household decisions—biblical gender roles don’t usually
speak to such issues. But the notion of gender roles does
affect marital expectations, how to raise children, what
church you will attend, and how one views Scripture, all of
which matters deeply.
A woman who expects her husband to be a spiritual
leader and yet marries a man who finds such a concept
demeaning to women and therefore offensive is going to
find herself in repeated unresolvable conflicts. When
finances get tight, for instance, she might expect him to
step it up and get a better-paying job. He might think,
“Why don’t I stay home and you get a second job?” If your
husband doesn’t even believe in spiritual leadership, you
can’t expect him to become a spiritual leader. If that’s
what you really want, at least marry a guy who has that
mind-set.
Guys who feel called to lead in their home but aren’t
allowed to do so will feel emasculated. Women who want
their guys to lead but marry guys who don’t will feel
frustrated. Women who strongly adhere to the egalitarian
perspective but who marry complementarians may not feel
respected and will have serious problems when it comes

to how the children are raised.
In a mixed egalitarian/complementarian marriage, both
the husband and wife will likely try to treat the other
according to their perceived sense of marital duties, but
those duties won’t be received as such—they’ll be
resented. What a complementarian woman finds loving
and respectful, an egalitarian woman might find
demeaning and frustrating, and vice versa. Since this rises
to the level of biblical application, it must be frustrating to
the extreme to aspire toward something that your spouse
finds offensive.
People who disagree on this issue can still worship the
same God, but it will be difficult for them to raise the same
kids or operate the same household.
YOUR CHANCE FOR A “DO-OVER”
Because I believe that God designed marriage in part to
make us holy even more than to make us happy, I also
believe that He designed marriage in part to confront the
pride of both men and women. In the complementarian
worldview, men have their pride challenged in marriage by
being commanded to put their wife’s needs and comfort
above their own (Eph. 5:25–29). Suddenly, another person

not only has a legitimate claim, but a prior claim, on a
man’s time and money and affections.
The Bible challenges the pride of women by telling
them to learn how to love their husbands and be a helper
to them (Titus 2:4, among others). The Bible doesn’t tell
women in general to submit to men in general, but rather
specific wives to submit to specific husbands.
The complementarian model, in my view, builds on this
soul-shaping reality of learning to die to ourselves. It will
help each partner grow in humility, service, understanding,
and selflessness. It’s a spiritually rich climate for potential
character growth in Christlikeness.
Avoid rejecting the complementarian mind-set simply
because you’ve seen it abused. A husband who claims
“privilege” is a husband who doesn’t understand the
meaning of the word martyr. My daughter went through a
college class that discussed gender roles, and her
response was intriguing. “Dad,” she said, “if most men
treated their wives like I see you treating Mom, and most
brothers treated their sisters like Graham treats us, more
women would be complementarians. Most women want to
be treated like that. But that’s not the case. A lot of people
my age have seen a lot of unhealthy marriages, and they

don’t want that. I think most women want what you and
Graham offer, but they’re rejecting what they’ve seen in
their own homes.”
I say this not to exalt my son or myself; there are a
million things I could have done better as a husband and
father. But I want you to seriously consider this: when you
get married, you get a chance to create an entirely new
family. Don’t let unhealthy family-of-origin issues unduly
shape the construction of your new immediate family. In
essence, God is giving you an opportunity for a “do-over”
based on His Word, not your experience. (I know there are
some rich, deeply intimate, God-honoring egalitarian
marriages as well. Obviously, I can only speak from my
family’s experience in this case.)
A woman whose father neglected her and focused only
on providing financially for his family often finds herself
drawn to the poetic guys who are in touch with their
feelings. Unfortunately, such guys often haven’t yet
realized there’s not a big financial future in poetry. After
marriage, she’ll soon forget about how emotionally
available he is and be frustrated with how economically
incompetent he is. It’s one thing to date a guy who’s “into”
you when you’ve been neglected by your dad; it’s another

thing to have your financial future tied to his. This doesn’t
mean you should marry someone just like your dad, with
all his faults—far from it. Just don’t let an unhealthy
pattern from your past dictate your choice in the future,
especially as a reaction. Have your mind washed by
Scripture, allow your heart to be cleansed by God’s
forgiveness and acceptance, and aspire to make the
healthiest, most God-honoring choice possible. You didn’t
choose to be born into your family; you do get to choose
who you marry to create your next family.
There are going to be some moments in your marriage
when the two of you just flat-out disagree with each other.
You’ll talk it over, table it, pray about it, come back and
talk about it again, and perhaps still disagree. In an
egalitarian model, I suppose you could hire or appoint an
arbitrator. In the complementarian model, if the man
wants to be a biblical husband, he’ll seek wise counsel and
then put his wife’s needs and concerns above his own.
Ultimately, however, in such rare occurrences it falls on
him to make the choice. In Lisa’s and my twenty-eight
years of marriage, there have been just two such
moments. (In case you’re interested, Lisa now fully agrees
with the first call I made, and the jury’s still out on the

second.)
Gender roles are much broader than these uncommon
quagmires, however. How are you going to raise your
daughters? What values will you instill in your sons? This
issue goes down to the very core of a person’s identity. In
my view, it also directly affects the way you read, study,
and view the Bible, but that raises other contentious issues
I don’t want to get into right now.
The point is, you really need to come to some kind of
agreement about this before you get married. Study it.
Reflect on it. Pray over it. Come to a firm conclusion. And
then make no compromise if you don’t agree. As I said
before, nonagreement on this issue should be a deal-
breaker.
One more crucial point: ultimately, this is a biblical
issue more than it is a matter of what you want. It’s not
appropriate to ask, “What role sounds better to me?”
Rather, you should ask, “What scriptural perspective
seems clearest?” After you reach that conclusion, find a
believer who agrees with you. Some issues can be
compromised on; this one shouldn’t be.
STUDY QUESTIONS

1. Were you familiar with the words “complementarian”
and “egalitarian”? Now that you’ve read about them, which
one do you believe most closely resembles what you
believe marriage should be?
2. Do you need to do more study to determine what the
Bible teaches in this area? How can you go about that?
3. Discuss the most likely problems that will erupt if a
complementarian marries an egalitarian, or vice versa.
4. How might these views affect the way you would raise
and train your children? Are you willing to compromise on
this?

13
YOU’RE LOOKING FOR A
COMPLEMENT, NOT A CLONE
I must have heard at least a dozen married couples tell a
large group how it’s impossible for two people to be more
opposite from each other. In heaven, I hope God will put
all of them (for surely, through the ages, there have been
hundreds of professional speaking couples carrying the
same message) in the same room and let them battle it
out for supremacy.
They always come to the same point: they still have a
really good marriage even though they’re not technically
“compatible.” The danger in you thinking this way as a
single is that there are different forms of compatibility, and
some forms matter much more than others. It’s worth
considering this issue since lack of compatibility is one of
the most frequently cited causes of divorce (even though I
don’t think that’s really what is behind most divorces).
It’s typical for opposites to attract, so don’t worry about
that. Compatibility that matters isn’t about sameness as

much as it’s about having the most important things in
common, beginning with a shared vision for life. Sincere
appreciation and genuine respect for your future spouse
matter far more than similarity.
Here’s the challenge you need to overcome as a single
who wants to know if you and your intended are
compatible: the process of dating and looking for a mate,
combined with the early days of marriage, provide an
artificial sense of compatibility. If you’re both looking to get
married, if you both want to start a new home, if you both
want to raise a family, those aims alone will take you
through engagement, to the wedding, and through the first
five or six years of marriage. Those are common goals
that will give you something to talk about and build your
life around. I can’t prove this with any scientific study, but
it’s my belief that this in part explains why so many
couples suddenly declare “incompatibility” even though
they obviously once thought they had found their perfect
match in each other. They’ve simply come to the end of
this false compatibility and realize they have very little
common ground with which to forge a new life together.
Let me explain. In the early days of your relationship,
compatibility is artificially enhanced via sexual chemistry.

Infatuation and immediate attraction are so strong,
compatibility or incompatibility barely even register. You
both feel crazy about each other—how could you not be
compatible? And then when you move toward marriage
and start planning a wedding, the ceremony itself gives
you something in common. You plan it, talk about it, and
divide up tasks to make it happen. After the wedding you
start setting up a house, move into a new apartment or
neighborhood, and try to join two lives. That also joins you
in a common task and gives you something to talk about. If
this is a first marriage, sooner rather than later you’re
likely to start raising kids. That’s a big thing to have in
common and requires a lot of communication. But
eventually—unless you have about a dozen kids or space
five kids five years apart—the kids are going to leave the
two of you alone together. That’s when the abundance or
lack of compatibility will either take you to new heights or
appear like a giant sinkhole that sucks the life out of your
relationship.
The empty-nest years slay a lot of marriages, because
the couple has slowly grown apart. They may never have
shared that much in common other than having once
“fallen in love” and gone through a few common life tasks

while sharing the same address. With improved medical
technology, many empty nesters have another twenty-five
to thirty years left to live after the last child leaves home.
That’s a lot of life, a lot of marriage, to share.
The good news is that when Matthew 6:33 is a shared
value, you are spiritually compatible, and that’s enough to
hold a marriage together. However, other forms of
compatibility will certainly make the relationship more
pleasant.
RELATIONAL COMPATIBILITY
The foundation of relational compatibility is a shared
appreciation for each other’s personality and character. My
wife isn’t like me, but I like who she is. There are many
areas in which I’m glad she’s not like me. What would be
a problem is if those areas annoyed me or caused me to
disrespect her.
When it comes to evaluating relational compatibility,
authors Ben Young and Samuel Adams remind us that
personality doesn’t change; we grow and evolve, but we
don’t become completely new people. So don’t expect that
to happen after marriage. The person you marry is the
person you’re going to be married to. That sounds

elementary, but a lot of people don’t believe that. They fall
for a person’s potential, thinking that the person they’re
marrying is going to change into someone who is
substantially different. They thus marry someone with
whom they might be somewhat “incompatible,” hoping
that, sooner rather than later, they’ll become compatible.
Do you want to be married for the rest of your life to
someone who sets your teeth on edge? Who embarrasses
you? Who you are afraid to take out in public? Don’t laugh
—people do this all the time. They marry someone who
does some or all of the above because they think it’s time
to get married, or they think it’s the best they can do, or
they get infatuated and rush into an ill-suited marriage—
and soon resent who their spouse is. Then they try to
change them.
Good luck with that.
Finding someone you enjoy being with is far more
important (and less narcissistic) than finding someone who
is just like you. According to Young and Adams, “It is not
necessary or even healthy to find someone with the same
personality traits. The issue has to do with your ability to
accept and adapt to your partner’s personality style,
assuming it will not change.”1 In other words, you’re

looking for a complement, not a clone.
You can be an introvert who is happily married to an
extrovert, as long as you like the fact that your spouse will
be the life of the party. It will be a good thing if you want
to be challenged to get out a bit more. If you never want
to go out with others, if you are embarrassed that your
partner derives energy from engaging (sometimes loudly)
with others, you’re best off not joining your life with his.
As Young and Adams put it, you want to bring out the best
in each other, and I think that requires mutual respect and
appreciation. If you don’t respect and appreciate your
partner, you’re not compatible. You’ll never become a
true, heartfelt companion of someone who bugs you,
consistently embarrasses you, or for whom you have little
(and dwindling) respect.
I know you love your boyfriend or girlfriend. But do you
also like them? Are they the kind of person you enjoy
being around? If it wasn’t for the sexual chemistry, and if
you didn’t feel romantically inclined toward them, would
you still enjoy their company?
Companionship is the relational heart that pumps blood
into your marriage. People are often drawn to each other
through sexual chemistry, and while there is a certain

excitement in this aspect of relating, you’ll be companions
95 percent more than you’ll perform as sexual partners.
Furthermore, sexual chemistry rises and falls far more
wildly than does relational companionship, which usually
grows deeper over time. Two companions can have at
least a satisfactory sexual relationship if they are
motivated by kindness and love. But a satisfactory sexual
relationship does not guarantee relational compatibility.
Remember, you’re seeking someone you are eager to
live with, not put up with. If you feel like you are already
tolerating your partner’s personality for the sake of the
relationship mainly because your feelings for them are so
strong, proceed with caution. Marry someone you want to
be married to for the rest of your life, not someone you
hope to transform into a satisfactory spouse in five years’
time.
RECREATIONAL COMPATIBILITY
There is a level of sameness that can be helpful, however,
and that’s in the area of how you like to play and relax.
Most people can’t afford to go on numerous expensive
vacations. Maybe it’ll be different for you, but here’s where
compatibility can become a serious issue. Lisa and I are

friends with a couple who go to Saint Martin every year.
That’s what they do. They lie in the sun for hours, get a
massage in the afternoon (every afternoon), have an early
dinner, and call it a day. They might do one or two
“activities” in the course of the fourteen days they spend
there, but no more than that, and only if they want to.
Such a vacation—especially going to the same place
and doing the same thing every year—would drive my wife
bonkers. She lands on an island and thinks, “How can I
explore every last blessed inch of this place in the mere
336 hours I have left?”
It’s not just vacation—it’s how you spend your
evenings, weekends, and holidays. When both people
really enjoy antique shopping, or gardening, or scouring
bookstores, or following their favorite football team or
NASCAR driver, or want to be at church as much as
possible, or run marathons together, that kind of common
activity increases intimacy as time passes. Shared
interests fertilize commitment, satisfaction, and
communication.
Here’s the reality: life usually separates couples. Few
married partners work together, so most of us are
required to be apart from each other during the most

active hours of the day, at least five days a week. If you
also have to be separate in order to fully enjoy your rest
and recreation, when are you going to connect? And can
you truly connect when you don’t really like what your
spouse is most interested in?
Older remarried couples tend to do a bit better in
seeking out compatibility in this area, in large part because
they have more experience. A lot of twentysomethings
don’t really know what they like to do on vacation in the
midst of working a full-time job (it’s not until you’re
traveling thirty weekends a year that you can decide
whether you’d also like to add traveling onto vacations).
This is a tough one to imagine, so I’m downplaying it a bit
for the younger crowd, but it’s certainly something to
consider and talk about.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMPATIBILITY
To stimulate your thinking and discussion, consider these
three real-life scenarios of how couples found themselves
in heart-wrenching situations where one or both partners
had to make some serious compromises that they never
considered before they got married.
A fiftysomething man was a leading prospect from his

party to run for president of the United States. His wife
didn’t want to move to Washington, DC, nor did she want
to endure such a nationally public stage. Though advisors
urged him to run, though people circulated petitions asking
him to run, though numerous pundits said he very well
could win if he ran, in the end he didn’t become a
candidate. His closest friends and advisors gave one
reason for his decision: his wife’s opposition.
Rebecca steadily rose through the ranks of a company
until she got an offer she never even imagined would
happen: a prime executive-in-training position at the
national office. Her employers were clearly grooming her
for a VP spot sometime in the future. There was one
major problem: her husband planned on taking over the
family business in the south, and Rebecca’s company
expected her to move to Chicago. She and her husband
had never talked about this possibility before they got
married: when the reality of achieving their dreams
collided, who got to pursue theirs first?
A young couple asked me to referee their
disagreement. He wanted to go overseas to do missions
work. She didn’t.
“You guys have been married how long?” I asked.

“Nine months.”
“Didn’t you talk about this before you got married?”
“We thought we had.…”
I can tell you this: if you marry someone who doesn’t
want to go overseas, they will win that argument every
time. You just can’t force someone to go overseas and
expect the marriage and ministry to prosper. If God has
called you overseas, it is your spiritual duty to marry
someone who has some experience overseas so that they
know what they are signing up for. Otherwise, you are
being a poor steward of your life call and putting it in
jeopardy.
All three of these scenarios contain a common truth:
your spouse will have enormous veto power over where
you live and what you do. Right now, all you can think
about is just being together, but the time will come,
sooner rather than later, when simply being together isn’t
enough. You will care passionately about what you’re
doing when you’re not together—your forty-to sixty-hour
workweek.
If you’re both on career tracks, for instance, what will
happen if those tracks take you in two different directions?
Surprisingly enough, couples rarely talk about this,

assuming “it will all work out.” I’ve been asked to referee
too many of these scenarios to believe that’s true, so let
me ask you: have you talked about where you might live,
what you might want to do, not just in the next few years
but also a couple of decades from now? Have you been
absolutely honest about what you’ll never agree to do or
where you’ll never agree to live?
Choosing where you’ll live goes far beyond
international/national discussions, of course. There is a
vast difference between a life lived in Manhattan and one
lived in Coeur d’Alene, Idaho. If you were born in the
Midwest and can’t imagine another life, respect that.
Some Midwest girls fall for a city boy and, in the abstract,
living in the city can sound romantic and exotic, but when
they actually try to live in a one-room apartment that costs
more than their parents’ mortgage did, breathe dirty air
for six months, hear sirens blaring all day (and all night)
long, pass panhandlers every time they go to the grocery
store (which they have to walk to, or take public
transportation to get to, and carry the groceries home in
their arms), they start to go crazy. Similarly, a guy who
revels in city life—restaurants being open at all hours, the
energy that never dissipates, the ever-full menu of

entertainment options—would pull his hair out trying to live
in a suburb that essentially rolls up the streets at 7:00
p.m.
There is nothing morally superior about wanting to live
on a farm, in a city apartment, or in a house in the
suburbs. But if you don’t agree, that’s a pretty major
challenge to overcome. Talk about this as a couple. Even
better, to keep things honest, if you haven’t talked about
this, write down your preference before having this
discussion, and then pass the papers to each other. It
could be an eye-opener.
If you haven’t ever lived in the city, and your potential
spouse is set on it, do yourself a favor. Rent an apartment
for a few months and try it out. You won’t know, you can’t
know, until you do it, if you can stand it. Similarly, if your
spouse dreams of a suburban lifestyle, try moving to a
small town or the Midwest on a trial basis. Having lived in
the Pacific Northwest, the Washington, DC, area, and
Houston, Texas, I can attest that those are three very
different lives.
It’s far better to move somewhere on a trial basis as a
single person to try out the option than to get married first
and then see if you like it. I know, doing this can be

expensive and it will slow things down, wedding-wise, and
maybe you’re already eager to get married. Even so, this
is such a significant compatibility issue that it is worth
delaying the wedding and paying whatever it costs to
make sure the two of you are environmentally compatible.
WHAT ABOUT THE KIDS?
The roar sounded like a riot. Biking through the streets of
Maastricht in the Netherlands, my wife and I thought we
saw a street protest coming our way.
“What do you think we should do?” Lisa asked me.
“Ride toward it to find out what’s going on, of course.”
The crowd grew larger and louder; the air was filled
with electricity. As we got closer, we laughed. An
elementary school was ending its day, and hundreds of
kids were being picked up by dozens of mothers for the
walk home.
There’s something about being on the other side of the
globe, in a town you’ve never been in before, and seeing
something so intimate going on—kids running into their
mothers’ arms, speaking a language you can’t understand
but don’t need to, that makes you celebrate life as God
designed it. The kids were showing off artwork, explaining

how they got a hole in their pants, talking about an
upcoming test. It wasn’t difficult to figure out what they
were saying, even though we didn’t understand a word of
it.
Put political correctness aside for just a moment. Men,
if you want your kids to have a mother who greets them at
the end of the school day and walks them home, make
sure you marry a woman who wants that too. Women, if
you want to be that mom, make sure you marry a man
who shows the economic capability of affording you that
freedom. If you want your husband to be the one at home
to greet the kids, you better talk about that as well. Are
you both okay with that little kid running into the arms of a
nanny or grandma?
Who is going to raise your kids? Are both of you
committed to being home by a certain time and keeping
the weekends free? (If so, that will keep both of you from
accepting certain jobs.) Is one of you okay with being
home alone with the kids on occasion?
How do you envision the weekends: yard work or fun
activities? That’s going to affect what kind of house you
buy. After kids arrive (or will kids arrive?), would you like
to live in the city or suburbs? Have you always dreamed of

foreign travel, or would you prefer to use limited vacation
time and funds to spend time with your parents? Will you
spend Christmas and Thanksgiving with your own kids or
extended families? Okay, which extended family? Would
you prefer to attend a large church or small church? Why?
What if your spouse says “house church” or “no church”?
Do you value family meals or watching the news on
television while you eat? Have you talked about your kids’
education—homeschooling, private schooling, public
schooling, sacrificing for college? Lisa and I gladly
scrimped on retirement savings to put our kids through
three private colleges; the majority of our friends (and
every financial advisor we talked to) thought our doing so
was foolish. It’s no big deal to disagree with your friends
on this; it’s a huge problem to disagree with your spouse.
PUT IT ON PAUSE
I know—this is a lot to discuss and think about, but that’s
partly what dating is for. Now I’m going to ask you to do
something that may feel even more painful: when you get
close to becoming engaged, put any public announcement
on delay for a few weeks and spend several sessions
talking through all these issues again with someone else

present. The reason I say this is that couples who are in
love have an amazing ability to hear what they want to
hear. Remember the would-be missionary who thought he
and his wife had talked about living overseas?
Bring up anything you can think of. An occasional
disagreement won’t doom the relationship, so don’t be too
scared. But consistent incompatibility, in major areas, that
can’t be resolved is something you’d be foolish to ignore.
You need to find a third party who loves you enough to
point out these incompatibilities as they arise.
If you compromise on too many of these issues, or
even on one really big issue, you risk fighting resentment
for the rest of your life. I’ve talked with some of those
couples, and believe me, you don’t want to become one of
them.
Remember: there’s not one right choice. You don’t
have to make this one relationship work if it’s not a very
good fit. It’s not wrong to want a certain level of
happiness; in fact, it’s wise to pursue general
compatibility. However, while incompatibility is grounds for
breaking up an engagement or dating relationship, it’s not
biblical grounds to pursue a divorce. If you make a foolish
choice here, the Bible is going to ask you to live with the

consequences. Why not seriously examine your
compatibility before you take the vows, instead of after? If
you know this issue has broken up hundreds of thousands
of marriages—that, indeed, it’s the most often cited
reason for couples who are getting divorced—don’t you
want to make sure it won’t be a major challenge in your
own marriage?
STUDY QUESTIONS
1. How common do you think it is that some people marry
someone for their potential—who they might become—
rather than for who they really are? Do you think people
will change substantially (in fundamental ways) after they
get married?
2. Why do you think it’s important to marry not just
someone you love, but someone you like and respect?
What are the dangers of marrying someone who regularly
embarrasses you?
3. How important is recreation time to you—evenings,
weekends, vacations, and holidays? How important are
various activities to you on those days? Are there any that
you wouldn’t (or shouldn’t) be willing to compromise on?
4. Do you think two people could enjoy a marriage in

which they have little in common, interest wise, on the
weekends or on vacations?
5. Twenty years from now, is there anywhere you
absolutely do not want to live (city, suburbs, rural, foreign
country, etc)?
6. Do you envision one parent staying home with your kids,
using day care, hiring a nanny, or trying to equally balance
careers and child rearing? What arrangement(s) would not
be acceptable to you?
7. If someone starts to recognize that they are making
many compromises in order to consider someone they are
romantically inclined toward, how can they work through
their concerns in a responsible way?
1 Ben Young and Samuel Adams, The One: A Realistic Guide to Choosing
Your Soul Mate (Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 2001), 92.

14
WHAT YOU DON’T KNOW REALLY
CAN HURT YOU
Dating can be a dangerous dance, with each partner
focusing on the wrong things and actually inhibiting the
development of a mature relationship. Unless you’re
thoughtful about how you date and what you do on your
dates, they won’t give you much of a clue about each
other. Going to the movies, biking through the park, eating
out—of course that kind of activity is going to produce and
maintain a certain level of affection. But it’s not real life;
it’s often not even real relating. It’s just playing. It doesn’t
tell you squat about how a man could face a medical or
vocational crisis, what kind of courage a woman has, what
values each person lives by, or what spiritual pursuit
drives the other person. Instead, you find out that you both
like vegetables on your pizza and movies that have a plot
—that’s something, I guess, but it’s not much on which to
base a lifetime decision. It’s okay to have fun. We need to
have fun. But some dates also need to be purposeful,

designed to ferret out your boyfriend’s or girlfriend’s
character.
Let me approach this from another angle: women, any
guy can fork over forty dollars to buy a dozen roses, but
not any guy is truly generous and unselfish toward others.
One romantic present, given with mixed motives, reveals
nothing about a man’s true character. Men, you can find
women who will take off their clothes, but can you find a
woman who will bare her soul so that the two of you can
become one? Or is she so hurt and troubled that she’ll lie
and cover up anytime you get close to the truth of who she
is, maybe even using sex as an escape valve to avoid truly
relating to you or dealing with conflict?
Your mission is to truly get to know this other person—
that takes intentional effort. Here’s what to do to get
there.
TRINITY TALK
Women, if a guy is more eager to undo your buttons than
he is to listen to you share your heart, you’re going to be
very frustrated with him as a husband. Joshua Harris said
it so well: “You can’t love what you don’t know. You can’t
be truly loved if you’re not truly known. And the only way

to know and be known by another person is to
communicate—openly, honestly, sincerely, humbly.”1
A young blogger interviewed me about marriage just
after Lisa and I had celebrated our twenty-seventh
wedding anniversary. She asked me for the one piece of
advice I’d give. That kind of question is tricky, because it
largely depends on the day you ask me. In this instance,
though, I said, “Couples have got to stop with the secrets.”
The truth is, we want to be known; we truly do. But
we’re afraid. If you see the real me, will you run away?
Am I even worth being known? Will the real me bore you?
Scare you? Repulse you? And so we hide. We start trying
to please the other person more than we try to get to
know them. We aim to get them to like us, rather than
intentionally help them to truly understand us. In such a
“dance” we never become truly known and thus live with
the anxiety that if we do become known, our partner might
leave.
Friends, do you want to live with those very natural and
common fears for the rest of your life, or do you want to
find someone who really does know you, accepts you, and
still loves you? The only way to get there is to talk.
Now, the mistake so many young couples make is that

they think sharing is confessing past dirt—sexual histories,
abuse, broken families, previous hurts, etc. That’s part of
self-disclosure and something that should be done (with
great discretion) at an appropriate time. By “appropriate
time” I mean this: if you think your relationship could lead
toward marriage, you want to discuss this before you
become engaged (but after you’ve proven this person’s
character so that you know you can trust them with such
intimate information). But this kind of confessional talk
quickly falls off. Once you’ve shared a past hurt, it’s
shared; there’s nothing more to say. And when your
disclosure and intimacy are built on past events, what will
you talk about after all your events are known and they’re
now mostly experienced together? This is when so many
married couples stop talking and start hiding. (The two
usually go hand in hand, by the way.)
You know why so many relationships slowly wither into
nothingness? They stop seeking first the kingdom of God.
There’s no overarching mission in the couple’s lives
beyond self-enjoyment. This entraps them in a life of petty
battles and superficial cares. If a woman spends far more
time picking out a refrigerator/freezer than she does
getting to know anyone who is spiritually lost, or becomes

virtually consumed with getting a better office with a
better view, that’s not going to captivate any man for very
long. When a man is obsessed more with becoming a
scratch golfer than with being available to God, how could
a woman not lose interest sooner rather than later?
People grow bored with each other. They share what
they’ve done and what they’ve experienced, but then they
have no grand passion energizing their current existence.
When we live for ourselves, we become boring. Most of us
are simply not interesting enough on our own to captivate
someone else for five or six decades.
What’s the antidote? Seeking first the kingdom of God—
not as a means but as an end in itself. Such a pursuit
cultivates a fundamentally different form of sharing, the
kind that comes first from relating to God. I call this
“Trinity Talk.” When we pray and read Scripture, God
reveals Himself to us. We see our motivations in a new
light; we see sins, but God reveals them to us in the light
of grace. We can humbly admit our weaknesses and gain
a vision for a better future. We are energized to attempt
great things for God. We never run out of things to talk
about because we are becoming new people with new
visions and new purpose. Instead of sharing small,

stagnant lives that produce little personal growth and even
less vision, we become dynamic people who are growing
ever more like Christ and are regularly reignited in our
passion to see God’s work spread in the world.
My good friend Kevin Harney had been married for a
number of years when God spoke to him about becoming
“recklessly generous” toward a church-based need. He
swallowed hard as he considered the actual amount he
believed God was calling him to give. That much money
would mean emptying out virtually all of their life’s
savings.
When he came home from work, his wife, Sherry,
explained how, during her morning jog, God had prepared
her to “give generously” to the same project. She gulped
and mentioned a number, fearing Kevin’s reaction. It was
the exact same amount that her husband felt God had
placed on his heart.
While this episode depleted their bank account, it filled
their marital intimacy to overflowing. They were risking for
God, growing in God together, facing the excitement of life
on the edge of serving God together. The last thing you
would say about Kevin and Sherry is that they are bored
with each other.

It’s not just about what we do for God; it’s about who
we become in God. When I keep relating to God, I literally
become a different person, so there’s always someone
new for my wife to get to know. The same is true for me
with her. Just recently, my wife prayed a brilliant prayer
for some hurting parents. The Spirit of God within her was
so mightily evident it renewed my love for her all over
again, and I thanked God for the privilege of being married
to a woman who is growing in the grace of prayer.
Living by the gospel provides the security so necessary
to build a foundation of mutual fellowship. I’ve had times
of prayer when God has revealed just how sinfully or
pitifully I’ve been acting or feeling, but He does it with such
assurance and grace and in the provision of Christ that I
come out of the conversation feeling washed, blessed,
built up, and strengthened. I might be really messed up,
but even more importantly, I know I’m really, really loved.
When I know that I’m so deeply loved by God, I’m willing
to be more vulnerable with my spouse, and I’m more
willing to attempt something risky for God.
Such ongoing spiritual insight and mission are exciting
to share, but they presuppose that we’re growing in the
Lord. If God wasn’t in my life, facing my sin would be

much too terrifying and embarrassing to let anybody into
my inner world. I wouldn’t want my wife to see my sin
without the hope that there is One who can change me.
And I could never come up with worthy dreams on my
own. I’d be obsessed with small-minded thinking related to
my comfort, affluence, “success,” and reputation. Boring!
I don’t think I’m capable of being known or knowing
someone else apart from the hope of the gospel. Because
of God I can forgive others when they sin against me, I
can love others when they act unlovable, I have a place to
go to get rid of my resentment, and I have a reasonable
source of hope for those who need it. Quite frankly, God
also gives me something worth saying.
My point is that your communication needs to become
three-way: bring God into the center of it. What is God
revealing, what is God doing, what is God forgiving,
counseling, encouraging you with? If I’m with someone
who doesn’t even know God, I’m going to run out of places
to explore sooner rather than later. Their personal
development will be limited to human wisdom and insight.
On your dates, find out what God is doing in and
through your friend. Do they even hear from God? Are they
aware of their sin? Are they hiding from their current sin?

Do they have any sense of mission?
By the way, it’s much easier to admit past sin than it is
to admit a current struggle. Is every weakness that your
boyfriend or girlfriend is sharing from some distant age,
but never anything they’re struggling with now? Since we
know from Scripture that “we all stumble in many ways”
(James 3:2), if your boyfriend or girlfriend isn’t working on
something or aware of something in the present, they’re
simply not reading Scripture, and they’re not listening to
God. And if they won’t listen to God, why in the world will
they listen to you ten years from now? You might be
fascinating, but you’re not half as fascinating as God.
In short, I want someone actively relating with God, so
that she can actively relate with me. I can’t find this out on
top of a Ferris wheel or watching LeBron James drive to
the basket. We’ve got to be alone. We’ve got to talk. Not
just about the past or her family or her fears, but about
what God is doing in her life right now, what He’s forgiving
her for, what He’s calling her to become, what He’s
inspiring her to do.
WATCH WITH ME
A young man lost a chance at employment when he went

out to dinner with a prospective boss. As soon as the
waiter put a plate in front of him, the young man salted his
food and started eating. The boss was blunt, and perhaps
unfair, but said, “I don’t hire people who salt something
they haven’t tasted. I want you to know what’s going on
before you try to fix it.”
That might seem trivial to you, and maybe it is. I’m just
making a point from a real-life example: when you’re with
your boyfriend or girlfriend, pay attention. How do they
treat their family? What’s their relationship like with their
parents? Their siblings? How do they act around kids? How
do they treat “invisible” people—waiters, janitors, and the
like? If a guy is too lazy to bus his own table at
McDonald’s, what makes you think he won’t leave his stuff
around the house, expecting someone else to pick it up?
Here’s the painful reality when you enter any dating
relationship: your partner can’t be completely 100 percent
altruistic. That person just can’t. She wants something
from you. Maybe he wants to marry you. Maybe she wants
to make out with you. Maybe he just wants to make you
like him. You can assume that she’s on her best behavior
with you. So whatever your boyfriend or girlfriend does for
you—buy flowers, bake food, offer encouragement—

comes from somewhat mixed motives.
The only way to know true character, then, is to watch
your friend with someone else. Women, if you’re with a
guy who wants to be in ministry, but he’s criticizing every
pastor and every sermon he hears, I guarantee you that
five years after he’s married to you he’ll have a whole lot
of criticism about your role as a wife. Guys, if you’re
around a woman who does kind things for you but no one
else, the days of her doing kind things for you are severely
numbered, probably within weeks of the wedding, if you
want to know the truth.
Choose dates that will test your boyfriend or girlfriend.
Sprinkle this season of your relationship with impromptu
“interviews.” Get into ministry situations, family situations,
maybe even stressful situations, to see how he or she
reacts. If one little thing goes wrong and ruins the whole
date, you can bet that on a future family vacation there is
going to be a whole lot of drama and not much rest,
because something always goes wrong on a family
vacation.
Most modern dating focuses on how two people treat
each other. That’s not particularly helpful, especially in the
blush of infatuation. You’ve got to get outside the

relationship to get inside the motivations and heart of the
person you’re thinking about marrying.
GO DOWN MEMORY LANE
Keeping with this theme—how to test a serious dating
relationship—now try to explore what your boyfriend or
girlfriend was like before meeting you. Did he enjoy
sports, did she attend church, did he do the things the two
of you enjoy doing together now? Without letting on what
you’re doing, purposefully try to crack the code of your
beloved’s past, as that past is a fairly good indicator of the
future.
Infatuated couples invariably try to change for each
other. Remember, during infatuation you become
obsessed with getting and keeping your heart’s desire.
Because you so desperately want the relationship to work,
you will find yourself astonishingly open to making little
compromises and temporary changes in your lifestyle and
even personality to accommodate the relationship. This
motivation almost always fades with the infatuation. If
your future spouse didn’t go to church before he or she
met you, it’s unlikely church will be a priority after the
wedding. If that person pretended to like sports, or

museums, or cooking, it won’t take long until the
playacting ends. Get to know your potential spouse’s past
so that you can get a read on your future. Be very
suspicious of any major change.
Talk to his or her siblings, parents, friends. Ask to see
old photo albums. You’ve got to be a bit discreet here—
don’t sound like an FBI agent interrogating a witness. But
informally drop a few questions in the middle of casual
conversations to get just a little bit deeper into your
potential spouse’s psyche.
As you consider these and other issues, I’d recommend
my friend Dr. Paul Friesen’s book Before You Save the
Date: 21 Questions to Help You Marry with Confidence.
Going through Paul’s book will assist you in getting inside
your partner’s heart.
PRAY
At the start of the Boston Marathon, everybody looks the
same. Sure, there are different ethnicities and genders,
but people tend to have a certain “look”—or they wouldn’t
be able to race there. This makes it difficult for spectators
trying to locate a loved one. At the prerace expo, which is
wall-to-wall people, my daughter said she almost called

about a dozen different men “Dad.” She saw a Boston coat
(which you don’t see that often in Bellingham,
Washington), a certain body type, and a man wearing a
baseball hat and assumed it was me—until the guy turned
around. In my hometown—in that getup, anyway—I look
distinct. Here, I looked like everyone else.
During the race, however, people begin to distinguish
themselves. A woman asked me my time the next day,
and when I said “3:31” she replied, “Oh, you’re much
faster than my friend. He was 550.”
“Do you mean he placed 550th or that he finished in
five hours and fifty minutes?”
“He placed 550th.”
“Ma’am,” I said, “there was a wall of humanity between
your friend and me at the finish line. He is way faster than
I am.”
We might have looked alike, but we didn’t run alike.
In the same way, dates can “look” alike, but get them
alone before the Lord of the universe, hear the concerns
of their heart, and you can get a better read on who they
really are in Christ. How do they talk to God? Is He their
friend or some distant stranger they almost seem afraid of
or embarrassed by? Do you pick up a heartfelt passion, a

sense of someone who is familiar with this conversation,
or do you feel like you’re listening in on someone who is
talking to you and trying to impress you more than actually
talking to God?
What does she pray for and about? Does he have a
concern for others, do her prayers reveal a trivial life and
petty concerns, or is he swept up by God’s compassion for
others?
Are you praying with someone who is comfortable
being silent before God, listening to God as you would in
any other conversation? Or is he in a rush to just impress
you and move on, afraid that silence or a lack of
eloquence will make him look bad?
Most of all, does it sound like this person has been here
before, or is all this just a show? Of course, people can
still “act” when they pray, but if you pray with them more
than a couple of times, you’ll begin to get a better feel for
where they’re at with the Lord.
PUT IT ALL TOGETHER
So, to wrap all this up, how do you really get to know your
potential mate?
• You engage in Trinity Talk. Move beyond the

superficial and historical to the present and
future. Don’t just talk about your past; talk
about what God is doing in the present and
what you think He’s calling you to do in the
future.
• Watch that person in his or her natural
habitat—at work and home; with family,
friends, and strangers.
• Take a walk down memory lane, with other
loved ones as tour guides. Find out what your
future spouse used to be like.
• Pray with him or her. Someone might
succeed in lying to you, but it’s a little trickier
to present a false front to God.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Since most of us want to be known and to truly know
someone else, why do we so often hide from each other
and even mislead each other in romantic relationships?
2. How might a “current grand passion” keep feeding a
marriage? What are the dangers of marrying someone
without such a shared passion?
3. How important do you think it is for someone to be not

just a Christian but growing as a Christian? How can you
tell if someone you are dating is stagnant or maturing?
4. What are the dangers of someone who freely shares
past failings but never current struggles?
5. Do you think it’s fair to suggest that the way a man
treats his sisters and mom might reflect on his character
as a husband, or the way a woman treats her brothers or
father might hold clues to the kind of wife she would be?
In what ways?
6. Are there dangers involved in dating partners praying
together? What might be some of the benefits? How can
this be done appropriately? (Or should it?)
NOTES
1 Joshua Harris, Boy Meets Girl (Colorado Springs: Multnomah, 2005), 102.

15
A NEUROCHEMICAL WAR
AGAINST YOUR REASONING
Sami and Danielle got legally married early on a Sunday
morning in Houston, Texas. They didn’t have sex until
Wednesday night, about eighty hours later.
Let me explain.
The young couple planned to get married in Mexico, but
Mexican law requires a Mexican clergyman, Mexican blood
tests, and a certain period of time in-country for the
wedding to be legalized. Sami and Danielle wanted to get
married by a pastor from their church, Second Baptist, not
a clergyman they had never met. So they had a short legal
ceremony performed by the Baptist pastor, signed the
papers, and caught a flight for Mexico.
Danielle told her new husband, “This doesn’t mean a
thing until my daddy walks me down the aisle.”
Sami wasn’t quite as eager to waive such informalities.
He had signed a legal document. A pastor he respected
and loved had declared him married. He was paying for a

great honeymoon suite at a resort in Mexico, so why, on
Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday night, was Danielle
sleeping alone in that beautiful, spacious room designed
especially for romance—and he was down the hall,
sharing a small room and even a bed with his dad? To
make matters even more painful, Sami’s father decided to
use these final hours they had together to dispense
“marital advice” in anticipation of the big day.
I’m not asking you to discuss whether Danielle should
have given Sami a room key. Though it was more than a
little frustrating for Sami—he had already waited so long—
he admits in hindsight that it was “special” waiting until
after the formal ceremony. But you might be thinking,
“Isn’t all this a little outdated? Come on, this is the twenty-
first century! Nobody waits until they get married
anymore.”
I want you to look at sex and dating in a way that
perhaps you never have before. You have heard the
sermons and read the biblical verses about not mistreating
each other: “It is God’s will that you should be sanctified:
that you should avoid sexual immorality; that each of you
should learn to control your own body in a way that is holy
and honorable, not in passionate lust like the pagans, who

do not know God; and that in this matter no one should
wrong or take advantage of a brother or sister” (1 Thess.
4:3–6 NIV 2011).
That alone is reason enough not to get involved
sexually before you marry. But understanding God’s
purposes for sexuality should reinforce your commitment.
God knows what He’s talking about. His plan is brilliant.
The more I think about sexuality and study God’s purpose,
the more amazed I become about this incredible invention
that He designed—and the wisdom He dispenses in telling
us how to use it.
If you scope out a female brain, you’ll find that a
woman may have up to ten times more oxytocin running
through it at any given time than your average man.
Oxytocin is a neurochemical1 that creates or at least
reflects feelings of warmth, affection, bonding, and
intimacy. And the fact that women have more of it explains
a lot about their general comfort with relating to others
emotionally.
There is one time, however, when a male’s level of
oxytocin approaches that of a female. Immediately
following a sexual encounter, the man experiences a surge
of oxytocin that may even catch him off guard, which

explains why single gals are sometimes shocked when a
man they barely know blurts out “I think I love you”
following a hasty sexual encounter.
Within marriage, this flood of oxytocin is a brilliant
attachment device. God knows infatuation can open our
eyes to notice someone, but He also knows those feelings
will fade. After we’re married, we need something that
will renew our affection for each other on a regular basis.
One of the most hurtful things young wives tell me is that
they resent how before the wedding they seemed to be
their husband’s number-one priority, but after the wedding
they dropped to number three or four. There’s just
something about the male psyche that after we “get the
girl” we move on to the next challenge. Suddenly, the new
husband is focused on his career, his golf handicap, his
hunting, his fantasy football league, you name it.
God is not unaware of this. He knows we men are not
altruistic by nature and may grow to ignore our wives.
Since our wives are also God’s daughters—and God is
passionately devoted to His daughters—He very
ingeniously created a hormone (we call it the sex drive)
that healthy men carry plenty of. And He designed
marriage with the instructions that the only legitimate

place sexual satisfaction can be found is with one’s wife.
So the husband has a literal physical reminder, “I need my
wife,” and when that need is expressed and met according
to God’s explicit instructions, the man’s brain is flooded
with a bonding neurochemical that reignites his affection
and passion for his wife.
Again, within marriage, this is brilliant. A wise man
soon learns that to be sexually intimate with his wife
requires maintaining emotional and spiritual intimacy as
well, so he has a physical drive that can keep him from
getting complacent relationally (unless, of course, he turns
to a cheap substitute such as pornography).
However, outside of marriage, what proves immensely
helpful to cement a relationship proves equally unhelpful to
test a relationship. If your infatuation is fading, but you’re
sexually intimate, you’re renewing your neurochemical
affection for each other. You’re learning to draw that
intimacy from each other and assigning that feeling of
intimacy to each other. Yet you’re still in a relational stage
when you should be testing and evaluating the
relationship, not cementing it. Even apart from the moral
aspect, premarital sex is a foolish thing to do for this
reason: just when you need to be most alert to make the

best choice you can possibly make, one that will affect you
and your future family for the rest of your life, sex creates
a neurochemical fog that will confuse you. You’re going to
feel like you want to stay with that person, even if you
mentally understand that it’s not a particularly wise match.
You’re literally launching a neurochemical war against your
mental reasoning. Dr. Paul Friesen boldly stated, “There is
no area that blinds couples more to their challenges than
premature sexual involvement.”2
Any way you look at it, sexual involvement before
marriage is unhelpful. If the relationship proves unworthy
of a lifetime commitment, having been sexual will make
the breakup more painful. It will dull your ability to sexually
connect with the person you do marry. And it will confuse
you as you evaluate the relationship. When you sexually
reconnect, you feel the effects of the neurochemical
cement. Learning to disregard this cement (which you
must eventually do to break things off) will undercut the
positive effects it has in marriage. You must train yourself
to ignore what God created you to pay attention to.
The notion that this doesn’t matter as much as trying
out your “sexual compatibility” is ridiculous. God designed
sex to be pleasurable and satisfying. He knew what He

was doing, and no surprise, He succeeded. Sex can indeed
be amazing. It’s also a skill that can be learned, and that’s
what marriage allows, so if the two of you aren’t
“compatible” on your wedding night, you have a lifetime to
get there.
Two people who genuinely care for each other and
who are growing in the virtues of kindness and generosity
will figure out, sooner rather than later, how to please and
keep on pleasing each other. You don’t have to “test” sex
—believe me, it works! Enjoying sex with each other isn’t a
test of the relationship—that’s like saying, “We know we
were made for each other because we both think
chocolate chip mint ice cream is delicious” or “we both
think sunsets are beautiful.” Join the club—so do billions of
other people. In the same way, plenty of people could
potentially bring you to the point of orgasm. And guess
what? You’d enjoy those orgasms. God created you with
skin, nerve endings, genitals, and a brain that makes sex
supremely pleasurable. In the end, all you’ve learned is
that God is a good Creator and engineer. You haven’t
learned whether the person who manipulated your body to
orgasm is capable of building a family with you.
Of course, staying sexually pure isn’t easy. If your

partner is a good potential match, it’s going to be
excruciatingly (and increasingly) difficult to stay sexually
pure. If it’s not difficult, in fact, you should take notice. I
love how my friend Paul Friesen described this: “Some
couples will boast that the physical purity part of their
relationship is going well. ‘We have no problem in this
area,’ they may say. If you have been dating for a while
and are contemplating marriage and ‘have no problem in
this area,’ you have a problem. You should be fighting with
all your might to stay pure—there definitely should be a
strong sexual desire for each other.”3 The absence of
sexual desire could be a serious indicator of underlying
problems.
According to statistics, it’s likely that you and your
boyfriend or girlfriend have already been sexually intimate
with each other. You might be thinking, “What now?”
Immediate sexual connection, like infatuation, fades. It
puts you in a fog for a while, but couples who are sexually
intimate break up all the time. I’m speaking here apart
from the spiritual context, which we’ll get to in just a
moment. For the purposes of evaluating your relationship,
decide from this point on that you’re going to do it God’s
way. You’re going to stop what you’ve been doing and see

if the relationship grows or suffers accordingly.
We also need to consider, which we’ll do now, how to
respond to a sexual past with someone other than the
person you’re considering marrying.
WILL OUR SEXUAL PAST STEAL A
FULFILLING FUTURE?
Writing this section is difficult because I’m going to make
some of you very angry. It’s going to sound like I’m telling
people not to marry you. I hope you won’t read it that
way, but rather, if you have been promiscuous, you’ll
consider the advice along the lines of what you need to do
in order to become a better candidate for a godly
marriage.
First, a caveat: there are almost no single adults left in
this world with a “perfect” sexual past. For instance,
various studies show that 80 to 90 percent of people who
get married aren’t virgins. I don’t know how accurate
these studies are, but when you add in sexually related
acts that fall short of sexual intercourse but still result in
orgasm, and then things like pornography, strip clubs, and
even just a lifetime exposure to hard-core cable television,
the reality is that most of us stumble into marriage with a

decade’s worth of sexual brokenness, at least. You will
have to look long and far to find a person who doesn’t
have some sexual stain in their past.
This universal dilemma doesn’t mean that the level of a
person’s prior sexual involvement doesn’t matter. It does.
It’s something you’re going to have to deal with in
marriage. Sin can be forgiven, but it does have
consequences. It corrupts our minds, trains our brains and
bodies in the wrong direction, and needs to be fought
against. When talking to couples I have noticed a direct
connection between a woman’s level of sexual promiscuity
and the sexual difficulties she has in her marriage. It
doesn’t have to be this way—we’ll talk about why in a
moment—but it often is, largely because people feel so
ashamed of their pasts that they rarely deal with it. They
just pretend the past didn’t happen or act like it won’t
matter and then suffer the consequences accordingly,
without ever drawing a line of connection between the lack
of healing in their past and their sexual performance and
enjoyment in the present. If there weren’t consequences
to sexual sin, it seems unlikely that God would forbid it. He
is a gracious God, not capricious, definitely not malicious,
and amazingly kind and generous. Directly rebelling

against His wisdom, doing nothing about it, and then
expecting there to be no consequences is worse than
calling God a liar; it is calling Him a pleasure-killing,
malicious liar.
We can face these very painful and embarrassing
issues and look boldly at our sin, admitting its ugliness and
its past power over us, precisely because God is not a liar.
In fact, we have confidence to face the reality of our
brokenness because we serve the all-powerful, victorious
King Jesus who died to cover the cost of our sin and who
sent His Holy Spirit to guide us into a new way of thinking,
a new way of feeling, and a new way of living. Without
such hope, denial and moral “tolerance” would be the only
polite response. With this hope, why settle for anything
less than God’s best? Jesus died to win this hope, to create
this reality. The least we can do is embrace it. God can
and will defeat the stain and effect of our foolish, sinful
choices.
THE PORN PROBLEM
Women, here’s one of the challenges you face: because of
the rise of the Internet during your boyfriend’s generation,
exposure to pornography is barely south of universal.

Almost every guy has seen some, and many guys have
seen a lot. The producers of porn have dramatically
shaped the souls and expectations of millions of single
men.
First, I feel sorry for your boyfriends. When I was
growing up, you had to be a certain age (sixteen or
eighteen—I can’t remember) to buy one of “those”
magazines at the store. Today, the Internet offers
salacious material freely, without making even a token
attempt to protect young minds. I hope you understand
that this isn’t a fair fight. Take any twelve-year-old boy,
naturally curious, and tell him, “Press this button and you
get to see what a naked woman looks like,” and he can’t
push that button fast enough. It might not even be prurient
—there’s just a natural curiosity at play. Then tell him,
“Now, press this button, and you’ll get to see what sex
looks like,” and his curiosity will once again get the best of
him. Some boys, exposed to something their souls aren’t
prepared to handle, will get a rush like they’ve never
known before and will then be ushered into a habit that
will stick with them for perhaps the rest of their lives.
Curiosity did more than kill the cat; it has captured a
generation of boys. God’s judgment is certain for those

who wage war on young minds like this, enticing them and
making it so easy for them to go against their conscience.
I feel for your boyfriends.
There’s an even more sinister side to all of this. Studies
show that porn is sort of like marijuana, in that both have
a tendency to be progressive in a certain percentage of
cases. About 5 percent of people who use marijuana will
graduate to heroin. Interestingly enough, about the same
percentage—5 percent—of pornography users will become
sexually violent to the point that they actually commit a
crime. The 5 percent of each category don’t know who
they are before they dip their toe in those waters. They
won’t find out until they open the floodgates and watch
themselves get carried away into actions that, prior to
their exposure, they would have found repugnant. And of
course there are various degrees of damage between
committing a sexual crime and having a polluted attitude
toward sex in general.
Thus, a young boy’s natural curiosity, cruelly exploited
and cleverly targeted, can lead him to enter a world where
his view of sex is warped and his soul is bent. And a small
percentage of boys will eventually become sexual
criminals. Any way you look at it, this is an evil world.

If you are dating a guy who has an extensive past of
watching porn and who, even now, can’t stop it, you ought
to be concerned for a couple of different reasons. One, his
expectations have been jettisoned to a dangerous place.
He’s trained himself to think that women like to do certain
things, actually enjoy certain things, and act in certain
ways that bear zero resemblance to reality. There is zero
“soul connection” in the world of Internet sex, and
connection is the only sexual expression that truly satisfies
long term. If you can’t ultimately satisfy the customer, you
have to shock him. If you can’t get him to bond with
someone familiar (as God intends sex to do), you have to
make him obsessive about seeing something new,
something different, every time, something even more
whacked-out than what he saw last time. And thus the
spiral toward more deviant forms of sexual expression
continues.
Listen, healthy sex is extremely pleasurable in every
sense of the word. You don’t have to try weird things to
make it pleasant and keep it exciting. Two people who are
connected relationally, emotionally, and spiritually, with
bodies that function the way God made them to function,
can have tremendous sex without resorting to unnatural or

demeaning acts. The Bible gives tremendous freedom to a
husband and wife to enjoy and pleasure each other in
many creative and exciting ways, so there’s no need to get
evil in order to get excited.
A guy steeped in pornography has had his mind warped
to the extent that he needs newer and perhaps kinkier
thoughts and acts to reach the same level of excitement.
Contemplating fifty to sixty years of sexual activity with
such a mind should make you cautious, as that’s a long
time to go a long way in the wrong direction. Furthermore,
if he watched commercial4 pornography, his soul has been
shaped into a selfish morass where it’s all about the guy
getting pleased. The whole concept of sex as a gift to be
given is obliterated. His thoughts will be, “Am I getting any
tonight?” Women who sleep with guys like this tell me they
feel “hunted,” “used,” and even “treated like a
masturbatory magazine.” That gets really old really fast.
On a spiritual and neurological level, guys who have a
long history with pornography and multiple sexual partners
are less able to bond with one woman sexually. They’ve
trained their brains to connect sex with women in general,
not one woman in particular. One of the prime purposes of
sex—rebonding husband and wife, recementing that

marital affection—is compromised.
A year ago, after hearing me speak on sex, a young
man in his twenties married to an attractive young woman
of the same age confessed to me that, all things being
equal, he actually preferred masturbating to pornography
over having sexual relations with his wife. He was
ashamed of this, he hated that this was so, but giving in so
many times had made him actually prefer fake, imaginary
sex over intimate relational sex. He hoped marriage would
“cure” his problem, but all it did was expose it.
People, we shape our brains. We cultivate desires,
habits, and addictions. Repeated actions, over time, make
us who we are. God can intervene, restore, and re-create,
but He doesn’t do that on the back of fraud and denial. He
heals through the practice of confession, repentance, and
the applied blood of Jesus Christ. Anything less won’t cut
it. Even after forgiveness, however, the brain still often
struggles to let go of the patterns of the past. Forgiveness
is one thing; sanctification (walking in holiness) is often
something very different. Even after a guy is forgiven, it
will take time for his brain to be rewired in a healthy
direction.
Which is why, if you’re a guy with a significant history

with pornography (to the extent that you’ve tried to stop
watching it and always fail), seek professional-level
healing now. Go to a counselor who knows what he’s
doing. It’s worth the cost; it’s worth the embarrassment. A
sexually fulfilling marriage is priceless. Dealing with your
past to make that possible is one of the best investments
you’ll ever make. Don’t let Satan steal a lifetime of
satisfaction from you by telling you that because of your
past you don’t deserve sexual fulfillment in the future. This
has nothing to do with what you deserve. It has everything
to do with what Jesus bought on your behalf.
One of the dangers for women to be on the lookout for
(which is why rushing into marriage is risky) is that some
men, when they become infatuated, will stop looking at
pornography for about a year, but when the infatuation
fades, they’ll go back to it. I’m not speaking as a trained
psychologist who can explain this, but rather drawing
conclusions from anecdotal confessions. Several men have
told me that the early days of marriage and sexual activity
with their wives kept the porn compulsion away for just
less than a year or so. When sex became routine, the old
urges came right back. Instead of spending the effort and
time to work on their marital sexuality to make it more

fulfilling, they found it all too easy to fall back into old
patterns of self-pleasuring.
Which means, women, if you become sexually active
with your boyfriend before he’s your husband, and he’s
had a long history with pornography, you don’t know how
true his healing really was. He might say, “I haven’t looked
at it since we’ve met,” but how do you know that in
another few months, once sex with you becomes a little
more routine, he won’t go right back to it? If you become
sexually active and marry him within less than a year of
meeting him, you’re hoping that he really is healed, that
he won’t go back, and that he’s not (God forbid) in the 5-
percent category hurtling toward a sexual nightmare.
To be safe, you want to see him have at least a year or
two of victory over this sin, without having sex with you to
hold him up. Then you’ll know he has the strength to stand
firm when temptation strikes after marriage, because it
will. If he has a history with it, he will struggle, to some
degree, for years to come.
Keep in mind: just because sex is pleasurable doesn’t
mean it’s easy. You will have some issues to deal with to
build a mutually satisfying sexual relationship. You don’t
want to be married to someone who will take a lazy

shortcut to avoid having to work on a real relationship. If a
guy’s only sexual outlet is his wife, he’ll be more inclined
to work on the issues as they come up rather than ignore
them.
ARE EX-STRIPPERS SAFE?
Guys, you don’t just marry a woman; in one sense, you
marry her past. If you focus on a woman’s outward
appearance and not her character, you’re likely going to
marry a woman who suffers from many more poor
choices in her past (certainly, many beautiful women make
great choices—I’m not warning you away from beauty, but
rather pointing out the necessity of making character a
priority). A therapist friend of mine has worked with a
number of different women who were at one point in their
lives centerfolds for popular men’s magazines. These
women often had difficulty achieving sexual satisfaction.
Though they seemed experienced in sexuality per se, they
had almost no understanding of God-ordained sexual
intimacy within marriage. As a result, there was a lot of
spiritual and psychological healing that had to be
accomplished in order for them to enter into a mutually
satisfying relationship. They had connected sex with power

and money. When sexual intimacy was supposed to
become real and all about building intimacy with a man
they cared about, they found that the road back to true
relationship was very difficult to find. How frustrating it
must be to be married to a gorgeous woman yet unable to
connect with or satisfy her sexually.
The same could be said of strippers who, in essence,
become actors for money. After a couple of weeks they
slip into a routine and learn to look at men as “marks” who
show signs of providing the best tips. It’s manipulative, it’s
chilling, but it’s a fact. When you connect sex and acting
for a living, night after night pretending to like a guy
because you want to persuade him to buy a lap dance,
how can you ever build a genuine relationship of true
intimacy and honesty?
But here’s the good news. My friend Dr. Steve Wilke
has spent tens of thousands of hours in clinical therapy
and has seen numerous couples healed of sordid sexual
pasts. He often shocks couples who come in for counseling
when he talks to a woman with a colorful history and tells
her that she’s a virgin.
She says, “Yeah, right, a ‘spiritual’ virgin, I get it …”
Dr. Wilke replies, “That’s not what I mean at all. I

mean this potential spouse could be your first one.”
The couples’ jaws drop open. “What are you talking
about?”
Dr. Wilke goes on to explain that they have never had
real sex as God designed it. “It’s always been about
money, power, and manipulation. Neither of you has ever
surrendered yourselves in a relationship where you are
truly loved, cared for, and protected, and where there is
spiritual covering through prayer and the Word. You’ve
never known Song of Solomon or garden of Eden sex. This
will be the first time that you have ever experienced sex in
the context that God created for both of you to enjoy. You
have no idea how different this kind of sex will be.”
To be fair to couples in these circumstances, Dr. Wilke
suggests that getting there requires a tremendous amount
of spiritual and psychological clinical work so that the
couple can replace the old habits with new ones. Potential
mates with clinical backgrounds and histories should
prepare for marriage with a trusted professional to learn
to love in God-honoring ways. You might think that
meeting with a professional sounds extreme, but if you’re
really messed up, it’s not like changing a flat tire on your
car—anyone can do that—it’s more like rebuilding the

engine. That takes expertise. The comforting news is that
Dr. Wilke has seen the gospel of grace heal men and
women in ways that reflect how Christ loved His church so
that they can actually experience sex on their wedding
nights as “virgins” according to the full extent of God’s
sexual plan for us.
If a woman knows she is forgiven, understands the
grace of God, and is loved by a man who is spiritually,
relationally, and emotionally in tune with her, she will
usually melt in his arms. Her past won’t vandalize her
future. The one exception is if there has been a moment
or moments of severe sexual trauma—that takes a little
more therapy.
Which means, couples, that if either of you has a past
that would make not just your mother, but even Oprah,
blush, you need to seek the best counsel money can buy
before you ever consider marriage. Furthermore, without
working out the past “through fear and trembling,” no
couple can expect the sexual fulfillment that God intended
as a realistic expectation. If you do your part, sexual
enjoyment is a realistic expectation. On the other hand, if
you think saying one little prayer will wipe out a decade or
more of misbehavior, you’re fooling yourselves and will be

banging your heads against a wall as you try to build a
healthy sexual relationship.
It comes down to this, for both men and women: past
sexual sin has consequences that often must be overcome
even after forgiveness. If the person you’re thinking of
marrying has dealt and is dealing with their past in a
healthy, mature, and gospel-centered manner, you can
proceed with some degree of confidence. If you catch
them lying to you or making promises but not doing the
mental, spiritual, and physical work necessary to be fully
healed, the marriage bed will eventually become one of
your least favorite places on this earth.
A SACRED TRUST
One of the things I love about marriage is how God calls
two broken people together and secures a covenant
relationship that supplies the necessary stability for two
people to heal and grow (seeking righteousness). You
need to count the cost, however, in determining how much
healing your future spouse needs. Before you get married,
it’s essential to discuss your sexual past—not in overly
vivid detail, but with enough disclosure to give each other
an honest appraisal of the issues you’ll be facing after

marriage. Let me put it this way: if I got married
concealing a hundred-thousand-dollar debt, a serious
health issue, or a prior felony that made future
employment problematic, everyone would admit that I had
committed an act of fraud. In the same way, a future
spouse deserves to know how much effort it’s going to
take to participate in God healing your sexual past, in part
to ascertain how much healing you’ve already initiated and
how much healing he or she is willing to be a part of.
My friend Ally Vesterfelt, who got married while I was
writing this book, dated a man who broke up with her
before she met her future husband, Darrell. That man told
her that her sexual past was “too much for him to handle.”
Looking back, Ally said, “At the time I thought his assertion
was a horrible denial of God’s grace, and I ridiculed him
for it (privately). Now I see it as God’s provision for me.
Darrell doesn’t feel burdened by my past, and I don’t feel
burdened by his. We have been honest about it, and we
both feel ready to embrace one another’s shortcomings,
whatever that means. We’re committed to ‘walk it out’
with each other to wholeness and healing.”
If, after sufficient exposure to your intended’s past, you
believe the person is healed and healing, it’s not unwise to

marry him or her. Once you make that decision, however,
if you want to be a redemptive force in that person’s life
and experience Song of Solomon sex, you must let their
past go. Author and pastor Joshua Harris was a virgin
when he got married. After his future wife confessed to
him her premarital promiscuity, Joshua’s dad told him,
quite wisely, “You need to settle in your heart that you will
never—whether it’s in the heat of an argument or under
any circumstances—use her past as a weapon.”5
It is kind and generous to take on someone’s debt
when he or she becomes your spouse. It is cruel and petty
to keep reminding that person what car you could buy,
what house you could live in, or where you could go on
vacation if only he or she hadn’t accrued such debt. You
don’t have to marry a person with a complicated past. If
your potential spouse hasn’t dealt with that past in a
healthy way, in fact, I recommend you don’t proceed into
marriage. But if you do marry that person, you will
undercut the security, intimacy, and stability of your
marriage by ever using it as a weapon. If you don’t think
you can get there, don’t marry him, don’t marry her. This
is one of those things where even one accusatory slipup
can be very, very hurtful. Count the cost, but once you

count the cost, you must let it go.
Sex is a powerful tool. In a healthy marriage, used
appropriately, it can be nothing short of glorious. As
people who believe God is the Creator of our bodies and
our sexuality, we should be eager to embrace His good
handiwork. But know this: the more powerful the tool, the
more training and caution you need when learning to use
it. That’s what this chapter is all about—not scaring you
away from sex, but helping you to take sex further than
perhaps you ever could have dreamed, as a servant of
your intimacy, a protector of your purity, a renewer of
your relationship, and a very sacred place of pleasure.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Were you aware of the way sex affects us chemically
and relationally? How should this knowledge affect the way
you view premarital sex?
2. Why do you think the stereotype is that a couple is
enthusiastically active sexually before the wedding, but
then sex becomes boring just months into the marriage?
Why do you think this happens? Can it be avoided? What
can you do now, as a single, to not fall into that trap?
3. In this chapter Gary stated, “Any way you look at it,

sexual involvement before marriage is unhelpful.” Do you
agree or disagree? Why?
4. Is it possible for a couple to know they are “sexually
compatible” without having sex? Does this matter?
5. How important do you believe it is to know each other’s
sexual pasts? To what detail?
6. How can you determine whether a person is healed
from his or her sexual past—either sexual promiscuity,
pornography, or something else? What are some wise
steps a person should take to evaluate if it is wise to
marry someone with a particularly troubled past? What, in
your mind, constitutes a “particularly troubled past”?
NOTES
1 Technically, it’s a “neuropeptide.”
2 Paul Friesen, Before You Save the Date: 21 Questions to Help You Marry
with Confidence (Bedford, MA: Home Improvement Ministries, 2010),
129.
3 Friesen, 123.
4 I’m already going to get in trouble with this chapter, so let me step in it
some more. Women, there is a difference between the kinds of
pornography your boyfriend may have been exposed to. Some is bent
beyond belief and proves to be far more damaging. This is something a
counselor needs to help the two of you work through.
5 Joshua Harris, Boy Meets Girl (Colorado Springs: Multnomah, 2005), 193.

16
PROBLEM PEOPLE
If you’ve caught the vision for a marriage that seeks first
the kingdom of God, you need to be on the lookout for
personality traits that will undermine such a focus. I can’t
deal with every one—that would be a book in itself (and a
rather depressing read at that). But let me focus on three
serious problem people when it comes to choosing
someone to marry: takers, people you can’t respect, and
“incomplete” people who aren’t secure in their relationship
with God. Other personality weaknesses might undermine
marital satisfaction in general, but these three traits make
a spiritually prosperous marriage more difficult in
particular.
IS THIS PERSON A TAKER OR A GIVER?
All this focus about marriage being an opportunity to grow
in love and learning how to love could be misunderstood if
you’re inclined to be a codependent person. A marriage of
ministry is a marital partnership. Two givers geometrically
increase their ability to give. A giver married to a taker

gets depleted and tired, which is why you want to find
someone who knows how to love and give. Such an ideal
isn’t selfish; it’s wise. If you marry a taker, you’ll
compromise your own ability to love others outside the
marriage.
The sad reality is, some people are givers and some
people are takers. Givers don’t always mind being in a
relationship with a taker because they like to give; it brings
them joy. But there are times when the giver needs to
receive. Let’s say the giver gets really sick, or is laid off,
even though he provided the bulk of the income, or just
goes through a discouraging time and suffers things he
has never known before, like depression or anxiety.
In those instances, can your taker learn to give? In
most cases, sadly, the answer is no. That person might
freak out, abandon the relationship, or just run around in
an emotional/relational panic, adding to the giver’s
problems rather than addressing them.
If you marry a taker, you’re sitting on a relational time
bomb, because you’re making the bet that, as a giver,
your fallen body and your fallen soul won’t ever get so
fallen that you’ll someday need help, at least for a season.
That’s foolish, because you will.

When a taker has to give, he feels sorry for himself
even more than he feels empathy for you. Instead of
concentrating on providing care, she’ll talk about how
difficult she has it, trying to get everyone to feel sorry for
her.
I once spoke to a couple in which the husband had
been a drug addict for ten years—their entire marriage.
His wife had been outstanding in her care and patience.
He finally submitted to God, was going through recovery,
and asked me how “this Sacred Marriage stuff” might
apply to him. I responded, “You have a great opportunity
to begin giving back to your wife and serving her in a way
you never have. She has put up with your addiction for a
decade; now you can focus on serving her as part of your
own healing, loving her as God’s daughter, and asking God
every day how you can love her like she’s never been
loved before.”
“But wouldn’t that be making her an idol?” he asked in
all seriousness.
In my humanness, I wanted to throttle the man. His
wife had demonstrated heroic patience and love toward
him for ten years, and he thought giving a little back to her
now might be idolatry?

But that’s how extreme some takers can be. When a
wife is giving birth to a child or suffering an illness, a
taker’s buddies hear only about how he’s not getting any
sex. When a husband who is the sole wage earner comes
home, fixes dinner, takes care of the kids, and even cleans
up the dishes, the taker wife thinks he’s being selfish if he
wants his twice-a-week bout of sexual intimacy (this is a
real-life example, by the way), because she’s tired from
her tennis match.
Even if you’re a giver who likes to give, it’s exhausting
being married to a taker. A taker will suck the life out of
you in many ways, and in one sense undercut your ability
to minister to others. You can still minister, but you’ll have
less energy to do so, because your marriage will be
holding you back.
If God is calling you to a strong ministry outside the
home, don’t even think about marrying a taker. Part of
being a good steward toward a ministry call is building a
life that can support that call, and marrying a taker will
undercut that. I have told some singles, as they have
described the dynamics of their dating relationship, “If you
marry this person, they’ll become your primary ministry.
You won’t have much left over after taking care of them. Is

this what you think God is calling you to?”
HOW DO I KNOW IF I’M DATING A TAKER?
A taker’s response is always, first and foremost, about
them. In an extreme form, if you’re late for dinner or a
date because you got into a car accident, a taker’s first
words will be, “Why didn’t you call?” or, “So when can you
get here? I feel like an idiot sitting here by myself,” or,
“Just call a cab or something and don’t make me wait any
longer.” A giver would say, “I’m so sorry to hear that. Are
you okay?” A giver would be more concerned about your
comfort: “Don’t stress; these things happen; what can I do
to help you now? Do you need to be picked up?” Their
thoughts will be about you, not about them.
Another mark of takers is that they will give when
asked to but almost always ask for something in return.
They have to get something out of the agreement before
they will be satisfied. You say, “I really miss seeing my
parents; do you think we could drive down next weekend
and pay them a visit?” and he’ll say, “Sure, as long as
you_______________.” A giver delights in giving because
it gives delight to his beloved. A taker negotiates an action
for what he’ll get back for himself.

It might sound selfish to want to marry a giver, but, as
I’ve said so often, do you want your kids to be raised by
someone who resents being annoyed, or by someone who
will parent with a servant’s heart? Do you want to invite
someone to a home where your spouse is more concerned
about the floors or furniture getting dirty, or where the
guests feel welcomed? Do you want to sit in a restaurant
with a date who treats the server like an underling or like
a person who may need to be encouraged?
The person you marry will be married to you in every
element of life. You’re not just choosing a spouse—you’re
choosing a partner who will represent you, as half of a
couple, to the rest of the world. Wouldn’t you rather be
part of a giving couple? Think about how much more you
can give, how you can accelerate your family’s ability to
love others, when you join one giving heart to another.
Ask yourself, when you spend time with your partner,
do you feel drained or invigorated? Would you describe the
relationship as healing and supportive, or exhausting and
combative? To you givers, asking these questions may feel
uncomfortable, but here’s where I want you to consider
marriage as a base to seek first the kingdom of God.
When you know that someone has your back and will help

you out if you get into trouble; that the spouse waiting for
you at home won’t be as frustrated by your delay as she
will be delighted that God is using you; that he will want to
listen to what happened and help you recover, you’re freer
to serve others. You will also—somewhat ironically—have
more energy to love your spouse if you’re married to a
giver rather than a taker, because a taker often uses up
your energy in other ways, most notably by regularly
demanding acts of performance. Takers thereby sabotage
your ability to give love to them in a way that is satisfying
and honoring to God.
WHEN RECEIVING IS GIVING
What I’m about to say might seem, on the surface,
somewhat contradictory to all I’ve said before, but it’s an
important qualification. A true giver can also receive. I
need to give; to be healthy and to honor God, I need to
serve my spouse. If my spouse won’t let me serve her, I
can’t honor God or love her like I should.
So a true giver allows me to give back to her because
she knows that I need to give, that it’s not healthy for a
relationship to become so one-sided. Receiving my love
and service is actually an act of love. Jesus let His feet be

washed. Jesus let His body be anointed with oil. Jesus let
women support Him financially. Jesus received and
receives Mary’s worship and ours. Jesus let Martha fix His
meal. Jesus let Simon help carry His cross.
Jesus is the greatest servant who ever lived, yet part of
His servant nature was seen in Jesus allowing others to
serve Him.
IS THIS A PERSON OF RESPECT?
As soon as you marry someone, you are biblically
responsible to respect that person as your husband or
wife. This will be much easier for you to follow if you
marry someone who is respectable. Psychological studies
mirror Scripture in this insight: people are happiest and
most satisfied in their marriage when they are married to
someone for whom they have a high level of respect. This
is particularly true for kingdom-centered marriages.
If the person you are attracted to is not generally
respected by people you trust and believe in, that’s a real
problem. True godly love, the love between two partners
in Christ who are passionately pursuing service in God’s
kingdom, contains a high dose of mutual respect. And
while you can choose to respect someone just because he

or she is your spouse, the kind of respect we’re talking
about now is a respect engendered from a person’s
character and actions, not position. If you are going to
grow old with someone, make sure it’s someone you
respect. If you’re embarrassed by this person, if you
constantly have to reassure your friends and family that
“what he or she did (or said) might look bad, but it’s not
as bad as you think,” you’re setting yourself up for a
frustrating marriage. Racism, prejudice, dishonesty,
laziness, gluttony, materialism, selfishness—all these grow
more unpleasant the longer you have to accommodate
them. If you’re already tired of having to excuse your
partner of one (or certainly several) of these, you’re going
to have a tough time when it comes to marital satisfaction
twenty years from now.
Besides, if you have to mop up after her for how she
alienates people, how he neglects people or displays
boorish behavior, how are you going to support or, even
more difficult, join his or her ministry? You’ll be so busy
trying to clean up and apologize for the mess your spouse
has made that you won’t have time left over to break new
ground together.
The three laws of real estate are location, location, and

location. The three laws of marital choice for a ministry-
minded marriage should be character, character, and
character.
INCOMPLETE PEOPLE
If someone thinks getting married is the cure for being
lonely, purposeless, or friendless, he or she is being very
foolish—and you’re being just as foolish marrying that
person. Marriage doesn’t solve emptiness; it exposes it, so
marry someone who has a solid core. If someone can’t
live without you, he or she will never be happy living with
you either.
I n Sacred Influence, I spent a good bit of time
reminding wives that “God, not your marital status, defines
your life.” The reason I said this is that spiritual security is
an essential platform for the full expression of biblical love.
If I’m not secure in my relationship with God—that I am
accepted, loved, and empowered by Him—then I won’t risk
saying something or doing something that might make my
spouse angry or frustrated. That’s a huge problem if your
view of marriage is two sinful people walking a journey
toward increased holiness.
When I know I’m loved by Christ, I can bear others’

disapproval. When I know God accepts me, I can act in a
way I’m convinced is right, even if it angers my family or
my in-laws, so I’m free to serve my wife first over them.
When I am secure in God’s approval, I won’t become a
child-centered spouse, neglecting my wife in a desperate
search to make my kids appreciate me, because that need
for acceptance will already have been met by God. I will
be free to love and train my kids while still keeping my
wife as my top priority.
Let me get really practical: are you more afraid of
saying no to your partner’s sexual requests that go beyond
the bounds of propriety than you are afraid of displeasing
and dishonoring God? Single men, as bizarre as this may
sound, you need a woman who is so connected to God she
will displease you before she will displease Him. A married
woman who is motivated by God first even above her
affection for you is a far superior lover, in every way
(including sexually). Women, the same is true for you. If
your man gives in to premature advances, or just as bad,
pressures you in that way, he is demonstrating a failure to
love.
Guys, if you marry a woman who is motivated by
reverence for God over affection for you, she’ll learn to be

kind to you and affectionate toward you even when she
doesn’t feel like it and when you’re acting like a jerk. The
same thing that feeds her chastity—love and respect for
God—will feed sexual enthusiasm within marriage. The
same thing that feeds promiscuity before marriage—
selfishness and fear—will kill sexual desire after marriage.
But this has far more to do with character than with
sex. I want a partner in holiness. After reading a rash of
stories of mature men in ministry who had some very sad
episodes requiring them to step down from their positions,
I pled with my wife: “Please, tell me if you see
unrepentant sin in my life that I’m just not getting. I don’t
want to end up like that. And if I stubbornly refuse to listen
to you, please take it to Steve or Rob [two close, lifelong
friends] so that they can take it from there.”
It would take a very secure woman to stand up to her
husband like that. But that’s who I want to live with. The
Bible tells me that I am more than capable of being
deceived by my sin, so why wouldn’t I want to be married
to a woman who can effectively counteract that rather
than go along with it because she’s too insecure to speak
up? The thought of Lisa serving me like that is comforting,
not threatening, because I know whatever she does will be

done out of love.
Yet some of you are getting very serious about
marrying a woman or man that you have to spiritually
carry on your back, hoping they’ll eventually find their own
legs. Take a deep breath, think about the future, and
proceed accordingly.
We’ve just addressed three problem characteristics.
Before we close this chapter, I want to touch on a
problematic process that could indicate someone has
some more maturing to do before getting married.
YOU DON’T NEED A SIGN
What if someone has read up to this point in the book,
believes he or she has found someone who wants to base
a family on Matthew 6:33 and who has complementary
marriage style expectations, thinks the person is a giver, a
person of respect, and is someone who is rooted in God—
but this particular reader still can’t make up his or her
mind, even after a couple of years of dating. Is that a
problem?
It might be.
Some believers say they must wait for a “sign” from
God before they feel “released” to marry. This entire book

has challenged the claim that there is only one person to
marry and that life is about finding that one person. We’ve
demonstrated, scripturally, that the choice is up to you—
both whether to get married and who you should marry
(as long as they are a believer). Since that’s the clear
biblical teaching, if your partner insists on a sign, that’s a
good indication that your potential spouse likely lacks
necessary confidence and the ability to make decisions. A
good chunk of life is about making decisions: where to
work, where to buy a house, when to have kids, who to
make friends with, etc. What if he has to wait on a sign to
have children? Is she going to have to wait on a sign to get
a job? What if his job isn’t meeting your family’s needs,
but he insists on getting a sign before being aggressive
about finding a better job?
If I was with someone who had dated me for three
years and said she still needed a sign, I’d say, “Okay, I
understand. But I need someone who doesn’t need a sign
to make a decision, so I guess this is where our dating
relationship ends.”
Remember, if there’s not just one person to marry, you
can courageously move on to find someone else who is
more suitable for you. My advice is that you find someone

who is a giver, so that you’ll be better able to give. Find
someone who is respectable, and you’ll be able to minister
and break new ground together. Find someone who is
complete in Christ, and you’ll be better able to pursue a
life of righteousness. Find someone who is more secure in
his or her relationship with Christ than in his or her
relationship with you, and you’ll be blessed immeasurably.
And find someone who is growing in the ability (and
confidence) to make wise decisions—including the decision
to marry you—and you’re well on your way to building a
God-honoring family.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Gary stated that some people are “takers” and some
people are “givers,” but isn’t this a matter of degree? How
can you tell if someone is primarily in one camp or the
other?
2. How might accepting Jesus’s words “Seek first the
kingdom of God” affect your concern over whether the
person you are marrying is a “taker”? Does this make such
an evaluation more or less important? How so?
3. Do you ever find it hard to receive from others? How
might refusing to do so sometimes be selfish?

4. Why do you think that when someone feels “in love”
they are willing to stay with someone for whom they have
little or no respect? What can we do to guard against this?
5. What would likely be some of the most common marital
problems if you married someone who wasn’t spiritually
“complete,” who felt like they needed someone else to
complete them?
6. Would someone insisting on a sign from God before
they get married make you more or less interested in
them? Why? What do you think the Bible has to say about
this?

17
WHY YOU WON’T KNOW YOUR
WIFE UNTIL SHE TURNS THIRTY-
FIVE
Greg1 is an insightful, mature, godly Christian man who
started a successful business. He married a woman from
another part of the country and seemed to have an ideal
Christian family with two daughters until his wife hit her
midthirties and returned to her family of origin in the
Northeast for a three-week visit.
When she came back home, she announced that she
was now a smoker.
Greg was mystified. “What kind of person starts
smoking at thirty-five?” he asked me.
I had no idea. I had never heard of this.
Then Greg’s wife began watching wildly inappropriate
cable television shows with their eleven-and thirteen-year-
old daughters.
“Are you kidding me?” Greg asked his wife.

She called him “boring” and went out and got drunk
with her friends. You have to understand: Greg had never
seen his wife drunk before, but the first time he did, he
tried to shield it from their young son (fortunately, their
daughters were away that evening). And then he had to
work through the excruciating reality that she had driven
herself home.
Throughout the first fifteen years of their marriage,
Greg and his wife had been on the same page regarding
values, raising their kids, going to church, serving God,
and making entertainment decisions. Suddenly it felt like
they were on two different planets.
As surprising as these issues might seem, they were
relatively superficial compared to other issues that arose.
Greg spent three years trying to hold his marriage
together with his “new” wife, but in the end, she got bored
with him and left.
I’ve since heard of several such examples—spouses
who take a serious turn for the worse not long after the
kids get through grade school. I’m not a therapist or a
trained psychologist, so this is just amateur speculation,
but here’s what I think is going on: some people from
troubled backgrounds manage to pull things together—for

a while. They put up a bold front long enough to get
married. They hold things together long enough to have
kids. They then hold themselves together long enough to
get their very young kids into or through grade school, but
as soon as those kids aren’t quite as dependent as they
used to be, the mom (or dad—it can go both ways) finally
succumbs to whatever addiction, mental illness, or
personality quirk they’ve been trying to repress for most of
their life.
If you’re a PhD personality detective, in hindsight you
might be able to find some carefully concealed clues, but
nothing that most people would catch.
In one sense, everything I’ve said in this book up to this
chapter, taken out of context, could seriously mislead you.
If you’ve heard me say, “Do your homework, find a godly
spouse, and you’ll have a wonderful, spiritually rich
marriage until the day you die,” you’ve heard too much.
There’s no guarantee. The reality is, people are dynamic
creatures. Many people change for the worse. Some who
seem to live for their faith in their twenties become ardent
foes of the faith in their thirties or forties. Some people
who remain virgins until they get married suddenly start
acting up sexually fifteen years after the wedding.

It’s really sad, but it happens.
I’m just trying to be honest.
Here’s the thing, though: if marriage really is about
why more than who, your mission will still be the same.
Hosea was faithful to God even as his prostitute wife was
unfaithful to him. Bathsheba became the mother of David’s
son, taking an honored place in the genealogy of Jesus,
even though David took her when she was still married to
another man and then murdered her husband. When it’s
mission first and marriage second, you realize you can
serve God in a happy or a sad marriage, an unusually
difficult or a (relatively) easy marriage.
Because there are no “right” people—in the sense that
all of us will “stumble in many ways” (James 3:2) and are
prone to sin—it’s all the more important that we pursue
marriage for the right reason. If the person becomes our
primary pursuit and that person goes bad, where does
that leave us? If we’re driven by mission (which is, at the
root, a relationship with God), then we will never lose our
core purpose.
Secondly, if you marry for the right motivations, if you
keep God first in your life, if you live by Matthew 6:33 and
also seek, as Paul wrote, to be ever filled with the Spirit,

you will never be alone in your marriage. You will face
trials, but you won’t face a single trial without God’s
comfort, guidance, and presence.
I say this because, absent the focus on mission, even
the pursuit of a “godly” marriage can be a selfish one.
Perhaps you want a godly marriage because you want a
godly marriage’s benefits, so you take your time, do your
homework, apply due diligence, give God an opportunity to
stop you, seek counsel from your friends, and get married
with the attitude of, “God, I’ve done my part, now You do
Yours: give me the marriage I want!”
It doesn’t always work out that way. People are
dynamic. They make choices. Our choices shape our
character. Sin is corrupting. If someone—even a believer
—starts deliberately giving in to a particular sin, it will
eventually change him or her into someone different. You
have no guarantee that this won’t happen to the person
you marry.
One of the main points of my book Sacred Marriage is
that God can use the challenges present in any marriage
to help us grow in holiness, learn to depend on God, and
increase our ability to love. That’s a glorious thing, if we
recognize that we need to develop in all three of those

areas.
I say this because I’m fully aware of the scare factor
inherent in this book. I’ve painted some horrific scenarios,
and the sad reality is they’re all based in fact. But that
shouldn’t stop us from marrying with joy and even a
measure of peace, assuming we act wisely, because we
know that God will be with us all of our days. There is no
perfect spouse to be found; even really good spouses will
try our patience, will sin against us, and occasionally may
deliberately hurt us. Yet God can do some wonderful
things through painful and even horrible circumstances.
You see, marriage isn’t just about finding the right
person so that you can have a good marriage. It’s also
about becoming a better person, and anybody you marry
can help you do that. My friend (and really good blogger)
Ally Vesterfelt, who as I mentioned earlier got married
while I was writing this book, read an early draft and
offered some well-spoken comments:
Look at your partner’s flaws and think about if
you can live with them, yes. Think about if you
want that person to be a father/mother to
your children, etc. But I would warn singles

against blaming a bad relationship on the
significant other. I think this sets us up for
failure in marriage. I spent too much time as
a single looking for a “good husband” and not
enough energy thinking about what would
make me a good wife.
In my experience my partner’s flaws have
most often mirrored my own, even if I didn’t
realize it. If I am in a relationship and think,
“Wow, my boyfriend isn’t ready to marry
because he has this glaring issue,” chances
are I have a similar glaring issue. It might not
be the exact same issue, but it will likely
mirror my partner’s. I worry about singles
looking at a bad relationship and thinking,
“Okay, all I have to do is break up and look for
another partner.” That won’t fix their
problem. Or at least it didn’t fix mine.
It took three tragic relationships before I
realized the problem was my own (I’m a slow
learner). I kept thinking that if I could just get
out of the “bad” relationship I was in I could
find a better one—a better guy. And when the

relationships kept being bad I still didn’t see
my role in it. I kept thinking, “Why is God
against me? Am I like a magnet for bad
guys!?” Three remarkably different guys and
remarkably similar outcomes later, it occurred
to me: wherever I went, there I was. Finding
a better guy was not the answer. I had to
confront what was going on with me.2
Those are wise words. Begin, even while dating, to see
relationships as a path toward holiness, and you’ll
naturally apply the same principle in marriage.
Relationships are God’s way of working on two people, not
helping you find the one person you want to spend the rest
of your life with. You can get so obsessed trying to find the
right person that you can mentally tear a decent but
imperfect person apart. Or, afraid of what might happen,
be too terrified to ever commit. I’ve probably contributed
to some of that fear with the sobering tone of this book,
but I’m going perhaps a tad too far in one direction
because I see too many Christians not even considering
some basic and potentially disastrous issues. If we truly
understood all that marriage involves, every wedding

would involve a certain amount of trepidation, if not
outright fear.
But here’s the hope: as Christians, we don’t believe
that a happy marriage is the primary goal of life. Glorifying
God is. In most cases, God’s glory is best pursued by
making a wise marital choice and building a family that will
honor Him. But remember Hosea, who, for the glory of
God, was instructed by God to marry a prostitute who
cheated on him, conceived children with other men, and
all but broke his heart. Did he have a “successful” life?
Absolutely. What about John Wesley? His wife quite
possibly was mentally ill. Things got so bad that when she
eventually abandoned him, Wesley wrote in his journal, “I
didn’t ask her to leave, but I’m certainly not going to chase
after her.” He had a disastrous marriage but also lived a
supremely significant life. John Calvin had a fantastic wife
—but she died barely a decade into their marriage, and he
lived alone for the rest of his days.
Remember how we started this book? Seek first the
kingdom of God. Not a happy marriage. Not an easy
marriage. Not even a wise marriage. Those are all noble
pursuits, but the first call of every Christian is to fulfill
God’s will for their life and to grow in righteousness. Most

of us will not be called into a Hosea marriage, but some of
you, even after making a careful choice, may well feel
Hosea’s pain of betrayal. This will hurt, but it needn’t
wreck or define your life if your spiritual priorities are in
the proper order.
The truth is, no marriage is easy. There is no
guarantee that the person you marry will continue to grow
in faith. She may backslide. He may get sick or break
psychologically or spiritually. But you’ll be okay. And you’ll
grow in the process. That’s a good thing.
So take a deep breath. God isn’t going to leave you.
Who you marry will affect you, but that person needn’t
define you. Don’t lose your joy, wonder, or even happiness
as you face this season in your life. Life is a journey
walked hand in hand with God. We want to walk in
wisdom, but God has plenty of experience helping His
children work through the consequences of foolish choices
(their own and others’).
Embrace the soul-healing words of Christ: “And surely I
am with you always, to the very end of the age” (Matt.
28:20).
STUDY QUESTIONS

1. How can the concept of “mission first and marriage
second” help you face your marital choice more
confidently?
2. In what ways could a person’s pursuit of a godly
marriage be rooted in selfishness?
3. How can you know, when dating, whether the issue is
that the person you are dating is not mature enough to get
married, or the issue is that you’ve got some personality
weaknesses that keep getting exposed?
4. How can you properly evaluate someone as a potential
marriage partner without tearing that person apart? How
do you keep that balance between recognizing someone’s
strengths while also seriously considering weaknesses?
NOTES
1 Not his real name.
2 Ally Vesterfelt, email message to the author. Used by permission.

18
WHAT ABOUT YOU?
HOW WOULD JESUS DATE?
So far I’ve been encouraging you to put your intended
through the spiritual equivalent of an SAT test. Keeping
with the theme of the last chapter, though, let’s ask, what
about you? Are you dating with integrity? In your pursuit of
a good marital match, are you acting with grace and
kindness? Is the process of your search honoring God?
In the interest of full disclosure, I did a miserable job of
this as a single, so I can’t use myself as an example.
Fortunately, we have a much more reliable source to turn
to: Jesus. While Jesus never dated, He did have friends,
and His friendships reveal the nature of His relationships in
such a way that we can imagine how He would date.
John 11 is a great case in point. Jesus built a strong
friendship with Mary, Martha, and Lazarus. When Lazarus
grew very sick, the sisters sent word to the miracle-

working rabbi to hurry back to Bethany because Jesus’s
friend was close to death. Remember, doctors were all but
useless then. Jesus was their only hope. Yet Jesus
purposefully delayed His visit until after Lazarus’s death.
It looked really bad on the surface. The Jews in
Bethany had tried to kill Jesus, so Martha and Mary knew
they were asking Jesus to risk His life to return. An
uncharitable view of His delay might have been that Jesus
was afraid. A slightly less uncharitable view might have
been that Jesus was just too busy or indifferent to a close
friend’s need. Grief isn’t always rational, and the
accusations that later flew out of these women’s mouths
when Jesus did show up demonstrated their distrust.
As God, Jesus knew that His friends would feel
betrayed. Even so, in the words of classical writer R.
Somerset Ward, “He disciplined the natural impulse of his
affection and waited.”1 Ward’s language gets a bit archaic
here, so let me paraphrase the rest: Jesus’s friendship
was so true that He put His actions above what His friends
would think about His actions. He knew they would
question Him, but He did what He knew was right anyway.
Is your friendship great enough to put your loved one’s
good above your loved one’s opinion of you? That’s a

difficult place to get to, but it’s the only foundation for
mature love. You have to become the kind of person who
does what’s best even if the person you love doesn’t think
you’re acting with the proper motive or concern.
According to Ward, such “unselfishness is only possible
by means of discipline, of warfare with selfish desires. The
highest bond of friendship is forged in the fire of discipline,
and it is true to experience to say that the greater the cost
of the forging, the greater will be the friendship.”2
Most people think the highest bond of friendship is the
fire of emotion and affection. What makes someone a
friend in the modern mind is that we like or feel fondly
toward that person. Ward suggested, and Jesus modeled,
that the highest bond of friendship is personal discipline.
Friendship is doing what’s best for someone, even if
what’s best is confusing or feared or resented. To get to
this place, we literally have to declare spiritual war against
our selfishness.
Romance is built on loud and unreserved displays of
lavish affection, but such displays can be evidence of an
undisciplined heart. Sometimes the most loving thing to do
is to limit your displays of affection by submitting to God’s
greater good for this person. Jesus could have

immediately traveled to Lazarus and healed him—and
never given Mary or Martha an opportunity to question His
love—or He could have allowed Lazarus to die, allowed
Mary and Martha to go through a natural questioning of
His love and commitment, and thereby teach them a
valuable spiritual lesson. Jesus chose the spiritual lesson
and waited until Lazarus died.
It goes a little deeper than this, however. Jesus told His
disciples that more than pleasing Mary and Martha and
even saving Lazarus was at stake: it was God’s will for
Jesus to raise Lazarus from the dead. Jesus couldn’t do
that unless He first let Lazarus die. Jesus lived first and
foremost for the glory of God, above every human
friendship, and that made Him the truest friend any man
or woman could ever have.
Jesus’s decision to return to Bethany shows the
courage of His friendship. Circumstances looked so bleak
that His disciples thought He was committing Himself to a
certain death. The disciple Thomas said to the other
disciples, “Let us also go, that we may die with him” (John
11:16). Jesus wasn’t moved by the opinion of His friends
or the threat of His enemies; He lived entirely to fulfill the
will of God.

A DELIBERATE MAN
Notice how deliberately and purposefully Jesus acted in
friendship, without regard to His safety or reputation. Let
me ask you a tough question: when you see a friendship
or romance just beginning to bloom, are you deliberate or
impatient? Do you seek God’s face before you “explore”
your feelings and discuss them? If your feelings are
contrary to God’s will, they are, at that moment, irrelevant,
if indeed Jesus is your God and not just your “friend.”
Many couples tend to be undisciplined and hasty in
declaring their affection. They rush in and blurt out their
feelings before seriously even knowing the other person.
And then they tend to be very self-centered, wanting the
other person to respond in kind and begin meeting their
romantic fantasies with equal desperation.
Jesus does the exact opposite. Ward pointed out that
the mistake we often make in our friendships is that we
“give too generously what is useless to our friend”—i.e.,
easy displays of affection—and then we are too stingy in
giving the “more costly gifts,” i.e., sacrificially reining in
our feelings until we know we can back them up. He
continued, “At the back of all appearances lies the truth
that the measure of love is its costliness. To analyze one’s

feelings is the worst way of arriving at a measure of
friendship; to count its cost is the best way.”3
To analyze one’s feelings is the worst way of arriving at
a measure of friendship; to count its cost is the best way.
Jesus lived and taught that friendship and love are
marked by sacrifice: “Greater love has no one than this,
that he lay down his life for his friends” (John 15:13).
Feeling romantically inclined toward someone but not
mentioning it because you know doing so would be
premature and unwise is one of the most loving and
difficult things you will ever be asked to do. It is difficult to
feel so strongly and not talk about it with the one you’re
infatuated with. And it is so delicious to hear that the
feelings are returned. But giving free rein to such emotion
and conversation is the opposite of love; it is selfish. It
threatens that person’s emotional and spiritual health. It
shows a lack of concern, a lack of care, a total lack of the
willingness to sacrifice on which true love is based.
Displays of public affection; verbal commitments that
are born out of sheer emotion; false promises based on
temporary emotions—these are the “useless” gifts that
Ward says we can be so generous with. But then we’re
too stingy with the costly gifts essential for the other

person’s well-being: we don’t consider his or her welfare
before we pronounce our commitment or affection; we
don’t consider whether our displays of affection will be
healthy or cause possible confusion and later hurt. Are you
learning to deny your selfish desires and put the other
person’s spiritual welfare ahead of your own emotional
and physical lusts?
How do you truly know whether you are committed to
this person and that you truly love him or her? Here’s how
you know: analyzing your feelings is the “worst way of
arriving at a measure of friendship; to count the cost is the
best way.” Your love is measured by your willingness to
act unselfishly, to even let the person think less of you, if
in doing so you are serving their spiritual advancement. If
you would rather not declare your love because you want
to make sure the relationship is wise, that’s counting the
cost. That’s love. If you would rather know whether your
feelings are returned before you even know whether the
relationship would honor God, that’s selfishness. Analyzing
your feelings is a waste of time (though that’s what many
singles focus on). Analyze instead the fruit of love, your
willingness to sacrifice, your commitment to the other
person’s welfare.

That’s what Jesus did with Mary and Martha. According
to Ward,
In our Lord’s mind we can see that the
spiritual welfare of the household at Bethany
was the first consideration. The wait of two
days was doubtless to enable them to
understand more fully their loss, and to draw
out more completely their faith. The tie which
bound our Lord to them was knit most closely
with their souls. If we would be true friends,
giving ourselves to those we love, we must
put the spiritual before the material in our
relationship with them. Marriage or
friendship, which is not based on some
mutual spiritual outlook and ideal, can never
reach perfection.4
A God-honoring friendship is one of the best realities of
life. A friendship that might also lead to marriage is even
more exciting, which is all the more reason we should
guard it and make sure it is built on a solid foundation:
The spirit in which we enter on a friendship,

determines its growth. Too often we enter
lightly and without thought into friendship, but
if we consider it as a part of spiritual life, we
shall be saved from this disaster. In such a
case we shall approach it as a serious matter,
striving to discipline it rightly from the start,
prepared to give our best to it, however costly
it may be, keeping it above the material in a
spiritual sphere. If we can accomplish this by
God’s help our life will be enriched by the
greatest gift to be found on earth, a friendship
such as Christ gave to Lazarus and his
sisters.5
Now, not only is this how you should treat others, but it
is also how you should expect your future husband or wife
to treat you. If your potential future spouse is generous
with the things that don’t really matter—physical displays
of affection, cheap words of commitment based mostly on
emotional intensity—but stingy with the things that do
matter—disciplining his or her love so that it builds you up
in the faith and leads you closer to God—then that person
is not the right one for you.

Don’t sell yourself short. If someone is pressuring you
physically, that person is being very selfish and
destructive, even though the selfishness and destruction
may be masked by passion. You need to be with someone
who will honor you enough even to deny you what you ask
for if he or she realizes that what you are asking for is not
good for you spiritually.
I am so convicted writing this chapter. I so did not live
this way as a single! If you’ve messed up, I completely
understand. There’s time now to do it differently in the
future. Put the spiritual first, learn to love in a way that is
truly love, and learn to date like Jesus would date. Doing
so will help you make a wiser marital choice, and just as
importantly, it will help forge the character you will need
to have a spiritually intimate marriage.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1. Why is it important when we seek to choose someone
to marry that the process honor God? Isn’t the final result
what really counts?
2. Why do think, given all they had already seen, that Mary
and Martha were still inclined to doubt Jesus? What might
this teach us about our own responses to God’s work in

our lives today?
3. Does the way someone dates, expresses their feelings,
or makes a commitment reflect in any way on their
character, or is that more a matter of personality? If you
think it does reflect on their character, how so?
4. How can someone practically apply the words, “To
analyze one’s feelings is the worst way of arriving at a
measure of friendship; to count its cost is the best way”?
NOTES
1 R. Somerset Ward, To Jerusalem (Harrisburg, PA: Morehouse, 1984), 91.
2 Ward, 91–92.
3 Ward, 92.
4 Ward, 94.
5 Ward, 94.

19
MERCY MARRIAGES
Never marry for mercy.
If, while reading this, you have serious concerns about
proceeding with a relationship, your heart may begin to
fight back: “I don’t want to hurt him.” “It would be so
embarrassing to break things off now.” “We’ve told
everyone; I can’t do that to her.” “He’s basically a good
person, so I’m just going to go ahead with it.”
These are understandable and even commendable
sentiments, but they are disastrous conclusions. This is
where the why of marriage is supremely important, and
mercy, in this case, is a woefully unwise motivation.
A young woman approached me after I spoke at a
church and mentioned dating a guy with a temper who
was also somewhat young in his faith. She felt she was
kind of “dragging him along,” spiritually speaking.
“I care about him,” she said, “and want the best for
him.”
“Good for you,” I said, “but that doesn’t mean you need
to be in a romantic relationship with him or certainly not

that you should marry him. Let me put it another way,
especially since you’re so young: is he the best you can
do? Is this the best man you can give to your future
children as a dad? Are you confident that if you wait, you’ll
not find a man who is less angry and more spiritually
mature?”
You have to be realistic. Given what you can bring to
the marriage relationship, are you selling yourself—and
your future children—short, or is this as good a match as
you could hope to make? It’s not selfish to want to make a
wise marital choice. It is, in fact, foolish to make an
unwise marital choice. If you go through with a less-than-
wise marital choice, your future kids will suffer for the rest
of their lives. You will suffer. Your community and church
will suffer the consequences of a dysfunctional marriage.
Your spouse will ultimately suffer, as who wants to be
married to someone who regretted the marriage even
before the wedding took place? Most of us will get just one
chance to build a family that seeks first God’s kingdom.
Wanting the best person to seek that kingdom with is
being a good steward of your life. It’s being kind to your
future children. It’s a gift to God’s church. It’s a powerful
witness to the outside world. It’s an act of love.

It is absolutely foolish to think the best way to avoid
short-term pain—breaking up with someone—is by
entering uncertainly into a lifetime relationship. If you
know the relationship isn’t wise or right, end it. Don’t get
married. At the very least, delay the wedding. Yes, it may
be embarrassing. Yes, there will be tears and hurt
feelings. But getting married to avoid short-term pain and
embarrassment is like fleeing the country to become an
exile for life just to avoid paying a twenty-five-dollar fine
for jaywalking. You’ve lost all sense of proportion.
If you’re wavering, ask someone to help you. Go to a
parent, a counselor, a friend, or a pastor, and ask for their
assistance: “I know I need to end it, but I don’t know how.
On my own, I won’t. Please, don’t let me go through with
this. Help me to end it in the kindest way possible.”
OTHER “MERCY” MARRIAGES
“Marrying for mercy” includes going through with a
wedding even after problem areas have been exposed,
simply because postponing the wedding to make sure the
relationship is solid or to work on issues first means you’d
lose deposit money for the hall, the availability of your
dream church, or the cost of the wedding dress you’ve

already purchased.
This is short-term thinking, at best. It’s like being afraid
to shift a million-dollar investment from something risky to
something certain because you don’t want to spend the
time to make a phone call. In the course of your life,
where you get married won’t matter a millionth as much
as who you’re married to. The wedding ceremony will last,
on average, sixty minutes; your marriage will affect you
for sixty years. Don’t let something so short term and
trivial lead you into something so long lasting and
profound.
Another form of “marrying for mercy” is getting
married because you had sex and think that now you have
to. Letting an act of sin lead you into a lifetime of
foolishness doesn’t honor God. That’s heaping sin upon sin
in an attempt to make things right. No, you shouldn’t have
slept together, but going through with an unwise marital
choice won’t fix or erase your past sin—only the cross of
Christ can do that. Don’t condemn your kids to growing up
in a less-than-mature home simply because, in a moment
of passion, you gave yourself away when you shouldn’t
have. Marriage is about more than you. It’s about your
kids, your community, your church, the kingdom of God.

Punishing yourself by going through with an unwise
marriage because you’ve sinned is, first, blindness to
God’s grace and mercy; second, an offense against
wisdom; and third, a potential act of cruelty toward your
future children.
Listen, it’s a lie for a couple to rationalize and say, “If
we decide we’re going to get married we can start having
sex now, and God will consider us married,” and it’s a lie
to suggest that one act of sexual intercourse makes you
married. Otherwise, all those people who are “living in sin”
by living together without getting married aren’t really
living in sin—they’re actually married in God’s eyes, and
the ceremony doesn’t matter. Such thinking puts formulaic
piety above wisdom and righteousness.
A third form of marrying for mercy is marrying
someone because you feel sorry for that person, perhaps
even thinking that no one else would marry them. Again,
for the sake of the church, your future children, and the
potential for you to live the most spiritually influential life
possible, this is an act of poor stewardship. It’s not your
life, your body, your future to give away. We belong to
God, first and foremost. We live to please Him before we
live to please anyone else. If God calls you to marry

someone, you need to be open to that, but make sure it’s
a genuine call, not an act of guilt or false mercy.
This is not to dissuade you from marrying a person
who is seriously disabled or dealing with some issues in
his or her past that you know will be troublesome. These
marriages, entered into wisely by discerning people with
hearts in the right place, can supremely glorify God. The
motivation, however, must be companionship and biblical
love, not feeling sorry for someone. Let a pastor or wise
counselor grill you. Make sure your advisor is the kind of
person who is strong enough to challenge you or release
you before he or she blesses you. If the relationship is
right and wise, it will stand up to the strongest scrutiny.
Finally, mercy marriages include getting married
because you feel sorry for you, so you compromise and
agree to marry someone who you know isn’t a good
match, but it’s the best you can find right now and you just
want to get the search over with. This is called getting
married because you want to be married, rather than
getting married because you’ve found a great match.
Desperation and dating are a toxic mix.
Having friends who get engaged over the holidays—
particularly if the friends have dated for less time than you

have—can make you even more eager to tie the knot.
That’s why, interestingly enough, a lot of couples break up
in January. So many of their friends got engaged that
when they didn’t, they think there must be something
wrong with their relationship.
Resist this pressure to tie the knot just because others
are rushing the process! If you make a subpar marital
decision, you’ll soon increase your agony and the pressure
you live under, not relieve it. You’ll face new pressure,
new frustrations, new challenges—and all of them on a
higher level.
Getting married to whomever you happen to be dating
just because you’re tired of being single is like buying a
house because it’s next to a restaurant and you just
happen to be hungry. It might be convenient for that one
meal, but do you want to eat there for the rest of your
life?
Change for the sake of change rarely works out. Be
focused in your pursuit, patient in your search, wise in
your final deliberation. We’ve already said it, but it’s worth
repeating: any counselor or married person will tell you
that single and lonely is easier to fix than married and
lonely. Don’t take a bad situation and make it worse. As

my good friend Ben Young says, getting married won’t
make you happy or an adult; getting married simply makes
you … married.
FURTHER BAD REASONS TO GO THROUGH
WITH A WEDDING
In their book The One,1 Ben Young and Samuel Adams
give a few other really bad reasons that people go through
with a wedding. Young and Adams don’t use the language
of “mercy marriages,” but their thinking is similar.
“I’ve invested too much time and energy [in this
relationship to let it go].”
This is an all-too-common sentiment, and its danger
lies in seriously shortsighted thinking. Agreeing to be
married to someone for fifty years because you’ve been in
a frustrating relationship for five years makes no sense. At
some point, you have to cut your losses. If you realize you
made a foolish decision to get in the relationship, and then
made a second foolish decision to stay in the relationship
too long, don’t make a third catastrophic decision of
cementing the relationship.
“I’m scared of what the person might do if [we break
up].”

This can go two ways: you might be afraid that the
person will hurt you or hurt himself or herself. Either way
shows the person’s unsuitability as a marriage partner.
If you’re scared to break up with someone because of
what he or she might do to you, do you want to live in fear
for the rest of your life? This is the time to get free, not to
maintain the nightmare, and certainly not to create
children who will share your nightmare. If you’re afraid of
angering this person, your children will also be afraid—do
you really want to create a family with such a person? I’m
not saying you should be rash in this situation. In fact, if
you’re truly scared, I’m pleading with you to work with a
counselor who has experience handling abusive people so
that you can learn the safest way to break out of the
relationship. But break out of it you must.
If your concern is that the person might do harm to
himself or herself, once again, ask yourself if you want to
live for the rest of your life with the burden of having to
keep someone happy or else watch that person resort to
self-violence. This might sound harsh, but you need to
hear it: it’s never your fault if someone hurts himself or
herself because you initiate a breakup, if you do so with
integrity and compassion. You shouldn’t be a jerk about

the way you end the relationship, and you certainly
shouldn’t be cruel. You can expect the person to show
emotion and even anger, but anything else is his or her
problem, not yours. If that person’s response is all out of
whack, something has happened to him or her outside of
and prior to your relationship that has led to such a rash
response, and you are neither responsible for it nor
capable of fixing it.
Of course, you’ll want to be extra sensitive. I would
recommend working with a counselor, alone, to plot out
how to bring the relationship to an end in the kindest,
cleanest way. If you do all that you can do to act with
integrity, you should bear no guilt if someone else chooses
to act inappropriately. Had you stayed with such a person,
you would be feeding the illness, not curing it. Perhaps
your leaving will be the wake-up call that person needs to
seek help.
“God’s called me to carry this cross.”
Really? Has God also called your future children to carry
that cross? Has God called someone else to whom you
could have been happily married to also carry a cross,
since he or she will be denied a lifetime with you?
I remember speaking with a middle-aged woman,

divorced, who felt God was calling her into a significant
ministry. She was dating a professional man who was
economically and socially very successful but particularly
young in his faith.
“If you marry this man,” I warned her, “he’ll become
your ministry. You’re not going to get much from him, and
it’s going to take a lot out of you to keep the family
healthy. Also keep in mind that you’ll be sabotaging this
other ministry that you believe God may be calling you to.
Are you sure this is God’s will for you?”
When you accept a cross, you’re limiting your ability to
carry other crosses, so make doubly sure you know what
you’re doing. Because of the account of Hosea, I can’t say
God has never called anyone into a difficult marriage, but
it’s clear the Bible doesn’t see the case of Hosea as
normative.
ROWDY AND ANNA
My friends Byron and Carla Weathersbee have counseled
numerous couples considering marriage. One story they
tell in their book Before Forever might seem sad, but it
actually has a happy ending.
Rowdy and Anna met at a Young Life camp and fell

deeply in love: “Long conversations while washing dishes
led to one of those Hollywood-scripted moments together
on the beach. You know the scene. As the sun set, they
began to drop their guard in free-flowing conversation and
found they had the same vision and passion for Christ.
They laughed, they shared, they entered each other’s
worlds, matching dreams and lifestyle plans. And they
both liked what they saw. It was at that moment that
Rowdy just knew that this was the one!”2
Rowdy transferred to Anna’s university so that they
could be together and build the relationship, which
eventually led Rowdy to pop the question. Even though
Anna had told Rowdy (on more than one occasion) that he
would need to ask her dad for his blessing before
approaching her, Rowdy talked to Anna first. This turned
what could have been a very romantic moment into a very
frustrating one for Anna and a bewildering one for Rowdy.
They managed to overcome the awkwardness and still
got engaged, but the incident itself became a picture of
some significant differences in their personalities. Here’s
how Byron and Carla described it: “Rowdy plowed through
life like an ice-breaker through frozen seas.… If Rowdy
ever found himself in trouble, he used his charm and

humor to wiggle out of it.… Rowdy was a bright, sharp-
tongued, make-it-happen kind of guy who lived life in the
fast lane.”3
Anna loved these traits about Rowdy and saw them in a
positive light; her parents had a bit of a negative spin.
They thought Rowdy could be “controlling, unkind, and
sometimes verbally abusive.” Then the Weathersbees
uncovered in premarital counseling that Rowdy had some
significant debt due to sports gambling (he called it “bad
investments”). But, as for most couples, these sobering
issues didn’t shake either Anna’s or Rowdy’s confidence.
Both thought, If we could just get married, share life, and
regain focus on our vision that we talked about that
evening at Young Life camp, then some of those issues
would resolve themselves—wouldn’t they?
See, that’s what happens. After engagement, couples
see issues and think that marriage will resolve them.
You’ve already invested so much in the relationship—
you’ve even gotten engaged!—that the thought of it not
working out is too terrible to contemplate. So you just
hope that marriage will make everything better.
But it got more troublesome in the case of Rowdy and
Anna. When Anna left the Midwest, where she was raised,

and moved to New York to be near Rowdy, she was
shocked at the reality of city life. She had grown up in the
suburbs, “where the greatest dangers included staying out
of the path of families out for an evening bike ride
together.” She soon had her fill of “all that noise, all those
dirty, unkempt people, expensive rent for a nasty one-
room apartment, and that hectic subway-chasing, taxi-
hailing, look-no-one-in-the-eyes lifestyle.”4
Quite wisely, Rowdy and Anna eventually realized that
who Anna was and who Rowdy was didn’t mix all that
well. While they respected each other, were attracted to
each other, and truly cared for each other, getting married
wouldn’t be the wisest thing to do.
I’m impressed at their character. Think about it: Rowdy
had changed universities to build the relationship with
Anna. Anna had defended Rowdy to her parents, and then,
after college, moved to New York to be near Rowdy. They
had spent some prime years together and even announced
their engagement to their family and friends. They had
invested so much that it would have been so easy to just
go along with the marriage.
But they didn’t. They broke up. It was sad. It was
embarrassing. It was hurtful.

But here’s how the story ends. Today, as Byron and
Carla told it in their book,
Rowdy survives on the money he makes
trading futures. Many days he loses big
money—but he has also found that he does
not need much to survive. He also works full
time for a ministry that mentors inner-city kids
after school in a rough, drug-saturated
neighborhood. He loves the high risk and
rewards that inner-city ministry and the stock
market bring, as well as the uncertainty and
action that each day drops on him. He is
fulfilling his passion to serve Christ in a radical
way.
Anna is now married to a wonderful man
and teaches in a suburban, Midwestern school
near where she grew up. Out of the security
that her husband and family bring to Anna,
she ministers to high school girls who struggle
with self-esteem issues and eating disorders.
… She is passionate about Midwestern life
and her relationship with Christ, and God has

brought her a husband who shares similar
passions.5
It was difficult breaking up, but the ending, as you can
see, is very happy. Both Rowdy and Anna have spiritually
rich and meaningful lives—just not with each other. They
are both seeking first the kingdom of God, but they wisely
realized that their respective roles in that kingdom weren’t
compatible. If you find yourself at an excruciatingly painful
crossroads, as Rowdy and Anna did, try to remind yourself
of this: when you close the door on a current bad
relationship, you’re not jumping off a cliff; you’re just
opening the door to another life.
SAYING GOOD-BYE
You may need to seek help if you need to bring your
relationship to an end; that’s what the church is for. Let
others help you carry this burden. In general, consider
these principles as you express your concerns:
SOONER IS BETTER THAN LATER
Once you know the relationship has run its course, don’t
prolong its inevitable end. Don’t stay together simply

because your girlfriend’s sister is getting married in a
month and you’ve already agreed to be at the wedding. I
say this because more damage can be done and more
hurt can be leveled in a month of uncertainty than in a
year of trial and error. It’s just human nature. They’ll
sense you’re pulling away, and when they bring it up and
you deny it, they’ll be able to rightfully accuse you of
dishonesty and wasting their time.
I’m not saying you should run as soon as you have any
hesitation; be deliberate and thoughtful. If you didn’t enter
a relationship too hastily, there’s no reason to get out of it
too hastily. But when you arrive at the point where you
know there is no chance the relationship will progress
toward marriage, be open, honest, and clear.
BE HELPFUL, BUT NOT A COUNSELOR
When your partner wants to know why you’re breaking up,
be a true friend and be honest. Compassionately but
clearly state the main reasons. Keep in mind, however,
that this isn’t the time for counseling. If the issue is that
the guy has no ambitions, say so: “I just don’t see you
going anywhere right now vocationally, and that’s a huge
problem for me.” This helps him and chases away some of

the uncertainty that creates even more hurt. But then don’t
get sucked into a counseling session where he might come
back with, “Well, what if I send out more applications, or
take that internship? Do you think that would be wise?” At
that point, be direct: “I’m not the one to discuss this with,
and this isn’t the time or place, because whatever you do,
it’s not going to change what’s happening here.”
Some people, by not giving any reasons, risk creating
anger that takes a long time to resolve. You’re trying to be
nice by remaining silent, but the other person usually takes
it the other way, feeling that it’s cruel to leave him or her
hanging—and that person has a point if the relationship
has been a significant one. So if you can find a sensitive,
tactful way to explain why you’re breaking things off, do
so. Giving that person some clues can help him or her
grow through the experience, which is kind, but that
doesn’t mean you become a counselor and try to fix what
went or is wrong.
OWN THE DECISION
Don’t blame your parents, your friends, or God. You made
the call to get into the relationship, and you have to own
the decision to break it off.

When you say, “God is leading me to end this”
(particularly if the person is less spiritually mature than
you are), you’re risking making the person angry with God
instead of you, when in reality you should be more
concerned about how he or she is doing with God than
how he or she feels about you.
Your desire not to pursue marriage is legitimate; in the
end, that’s all someone else needs to know. It’s your
decision. Own it.
IF IT’S OVER, TELL THEM IT’S OVER
Don’t say, “It’s time to take a break” if you don’t ever
intend to get back together again. If the relationship is
over for good, say so. It’s unkind to leave a boyfriend or
girlfriend hanging or to give false hope, just to spare you
the pain of watching that person hurt. Hurt will come
eventually, because one day he or she will realize you’re
never going to get back together again—either when you
start dating someone else or when more time passes and
you don’t pursue them. If you give any hope, that person
may even expect you to let him or her know if you meet
someone else, which will set up another painful
conversation.

Do yourself and them a favor: end it completely,
thoroughly, and without any ambiguity.
THE HIGHEST STAKES IMAGINABLE
Let me remind you that the stakes are simply too high to
compromise on this: never marry for mercy. Get married
because this is the best person you can find with whom
you can build a family that will honor God.
Marrying a person with low character simply because
you feel sorry for him or her or don’t want to hurt
someone’s feelings deprives someone else of the
opportunity to spend a lifetime with you in a spiritually
profitable marriage. You only have one life, one body, one
heart to give away. Make it count.
STUDY QUESTIONS
1. What are the benefits, to you and others, of you making
a wise marital choice?
2. Have you ever spoken to someone who confessed that
they got married even though they knew they shouldn’t
have? What was their story? Why did they go through with
the wedding?
3. Do you believe a couple becoming sexually active should

get married just because they are sexually active? Why or
why not?
4. What are the dangers of marrying someone in part
because you feel sorry for them?
5. Can you think of any other poor reasons that Gary didn’t
mention of why people go through with weddings?
6. What do you think would have happened if Rowdy and
Anna had gone through with the wedding? How can their
story encourage other couples?
7. Gary lists the following strategies for ending a
relationship. Are there any you disagree with? Any you
would add?
• Sooner is Better than Later
• Be Helpful, but Not a Counselor
• Own the Decision
• If It’s Over, Tell Them It’s Over
NOTES
1 Ben Young and Samuel Adams, The One (Nashville: Thomas Nelson,
2001), 150–51.
2 Byron and Carla Weathersbee, Before Forever: How Do You Know That
You Know? (Waco, TX: Leading Edge, 2008), 27. Used by permission.
3 Weathersbee, 28.
4 Weathersbee, 28–29.
5 Weathersbee, 38–39.

EPILOGUE
A NEW VISION
When Adoniram Judson wrote to Ann Hasseltine’s father,
asking for Ann’s hand in marriage, he didn’t sugarcoat the
future. Intent on becoming the United States’ first foreign
missionary, Adoniram was up front about the dangers Mr.
Hasseltine’s daughter might face:
I have now to ask whether you can consent to
part with your daughter, whether you can
consent to her departure to a heathen land,
and her subjection to the hardships and
suffering of a missionary life. Whether you
can consent to her exposure to the dangers of
the ocean, to the fatal influence of the
southern climate of India, to every kind of
want and distress, to degradation, insult,
persecution, and perhaps a violent death.1
It’s not like Ann lacked options. Widely considered “the
most beautiful girl in Bradford, Massachusetts,” Ann had

more than her share of suitors. Yet it was Adoniram who
gained her affection, and his letter to her father, sadly,
proved prophetic. Once in Burma, the couple lost a child to
tropical fever, and when war broke out, Adoniram was
arrested for being a “spy.” He hung upside down for days
on end, suspended from the ceiling, while Ann desperately
sought his release. She finally managed to visit her
husband eight months after his arrest and handed over a
precious bundle: newborn daughter Maria.2
Months followed, and though Adoniram was finally
released, both Ann and Maria died of fever soon
thereafter.
I can’t even imagine what inner agony Adoniram went
through. He was human—the horrific events pushed him
into a nervous breakdown—but he supernaturally
persevered and went on to live a life overflowing with
faithful spiritual labor.
God may not have called you to the mission field, but I
want you to consider what brought Adoniram and Ann
together: a mission so large that they willingly faced, and
then endured, some of the worst nightmares imaginable.
Let me give you an even worse nightmare, however: a
marriage without a mission, a life without purpose, a

relationship without any end beyond its own “happiness.”
Matthew 6:33, seeking first the kingdom of God, will
breathe life into any marriage and remains, I am
convinced, the single best reason for two people to join
their futures together. Such couples aren’t lost in simply
pursuing a pleasant five or six decades; they are
determined to live a life with eternal impact.
Remember the tale of two tears—the two stories with
which I began this book? One married person cried tears
of frustration; the other was crying tears of joy. I asked,
what kind of tears do you want to be shedding ten years
from now?
Having been writing and speaking on marriage for a
decade and a half, I’ve seen how much time and effort are
spent by people trying to survive and fix extremely difficult
marriages. I don’t think any marriage is easy. But some
marriages really do require an extra amount of
maintenance. If you marry an addict or someone who is
spiritually immature, for instance, you’re setting yourself
up for a lifetime of distractions.
Paul says this is one of the main concerns when
considering marriage. He points out that married people
are distracted, having to spend significant time and mental

effort to please their husband or wife. However, some
marriages are more distracting than others, while some
marriages provide a base of support for more focused
service to God.
I ended my book Sacred Marriage with the picture of
“holy couples.” We usually think of saints as individuals,
but what if we took marriage seriously enough to talk
about saintly couples, marriages where God is unusually
present and active, to the extent where one new identity
emerges, a family established on seeking first the kingdom
of God?
What if a few Christian couples took this
pioneering challenge seriously, and set out to
become a “couple-saint”? No longer defining
their relationship to God in solitary terms, but
working together to present themselves as a
holy unit, a pair of cherubim in the middle of
whom God’s presence is radically awakened?
It is … an interesting invitation. Is there
anyone who will take up that invitation for
today?3
If singles would consider this before they get married,

if they would purify their motives to pursue marriage, and
if they would make this the basis of who they choose to
marry, we’d see much more of this. In other words, if you
look at the question of why you want to marry before you
choose who to marry, you’re more likely to make a wiser
choice about the who. It’s not a choice between either why
or who. It’s that asking the why question first helps you
choose the best who.
I ache for the day when people make such wise marital
choices that they can pray through where to live to make
the most significant impact for Christ instead of praying
that they could merely be able to exist in the same house
without yelling and fighting. I pray that God will raise up
couples who are so in tune with each other that they will
be that much stronger to withstand the inevitable spiritual
assaults that are unleashed on any productive Christian. I
pray Christian believers will conceive and/or adopt a lot of
children and let those kids see what a God-centered
marriage looks like. I pray that while such couples will
certainly need times of support and counsel on their own
as they work through the issues of their sin, even more
they will be a resource to other couples—of counsel,
prayer, encouragement, and example.

You have no idea how much kingdom time is wasted on
ill-matched people trying to make their marriages a little
less insufferable. I want you to gain a positive picture—a
vision for how much kingdom work could be accomplished
by two well-matched people working in harmony to seek
the kingdom of God, grow in righteousness, and fulfill their
unique calling in Christ.
We need more of these families. There can’t ever be
too many of such families. There is a dearth of these
families today. Most of you will get just one chance to
create such a family. Please, choose wisely. We need you
to make a wise choice.
NOTES
1 Cited in Robert J. Morgan, On This Day: 365 Amazing and Inspiring
Stories about Saints, Martyrs and Heroes (Nashville: Thomas Nelson,
1997), February 15.
2 Morgan, On This Day.
3 Gary Thomas, Sacred Marriage (Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 2000), 268.

AUTHOR INFORMATION
Feel free to contact Gary at Gary@GaryThomas.com.
Though he cannot respond personally to all
correspondence, he welcomes your feedback. Please
understand, however, that he is neither qualified nor able
to provide counsel via email.
For information about Gary’s speaking schedule, visit
his website (www.GaryThomas.com). You can follow Gary
on Twitter (@garyLthomas) or connect with him on
Facebook (links are available on his website). To inquire
about inviting Gary to your church, please email his
assistant: Laura@GaryThomas.com.

THE SACRED SEARCH
Published by David C Cook
4050 Lee Vance View
Colorado Springs, CO 80918 U.S.A.
David C Cook Distribution Canada
55 Woodslee Avenue, Paris, Ontario, Canada N3L 3E5
David C Cook U.K., Kingsway Communications Eastbourne, East Sussex
BN23 6NT, England The graphic circle C logo is a registered trademark of
David C Cook.
All rights reserved. No part of this ebook may be reproduced, scanned,
resold, or distributed by or through any print or electronic medium
without written permission from the publisher. This ebook is licensed solely
for the personal and noncommercial use of the original authorized
purchaser, subject to the terms of use under which it was purchased.
Please do not participate in or encourage piracy of copyrighted materials in
violation of the author’s rights.
The website addresses recommended throughout this book are offered as
a resource to you. These websites are not intended in any way to be or
imply an endorsement on the part of David C Cook, nor do we vouch for
their content.
Some names have been changed to protect privacy. Permission has been
obtained for usage of all other personal accounts.
All Scripture quotations, unless otherwise noted, are taken from the Holy
Bible, New International Version®, NIV®. Copyright © 1973, 1984 by
Biblica, Inc.™ Used by permission of Zondervan. All rights reserved
worldwide. www.zondervan.com. Scripture quotations marked NIV 2011 are
taken from the Holy Bible, New International Version®, NIV®. Copyright
© 1973, 2011 by Biblica, Inc.™ Used by permission of Zondervan. All rights
reserved worldwide. www.zondervan.com; NKJV are taken from the New
King James Version®. Copyright © 1982 by Thomas Nelson, Inc. Used by

permission. All rights reserved; ESV are taken from The Holy Bible, English
Standard Version® (ESV®), copyright © 2001 by Crossway, a publishing
ministry of Good News Publishers. Used by permission. All rights reserved;
NASB are taken from the New American Standard Bible®, Copyright ©
1960, 1995 by The Lockman Foundation. Used by permission.
(www.Lockman.org.) The author has added italics to Scripture quotations
for emphasis.
LCCN 2012951904
ISBN 978-1-4347-0489-4
eISBN 978-1-4347-0554-9
© 2013 Gary Thomas
Published in associations with Yates & Yates, www.yates2.com.
The Team: Alex Field, Karen Lee-Thorp, Amy Konyndyk, Nick Lee, Caitlyn
Carlson, Karen Athen Cover Design: JWH Garphic Arts, James Hall First
Edition 2013

Photo by Jim Paliungus
GARY THOMAS is writer-in-residence at
Second Baptist Church in Houston, a frequent
guest on Focus on the Family and FamilyLife
Today radio, and a popular speaker around
the world. His award-winning books have
been translated into a dozen languages and
sold hundreds
of thousands of copies. Thomas and his wife
have three children.
Also available by GARY THOMAS:

The Sacred Search Couple’s Conversation Guide
The Sacred Search Study Resource
If you enjoyed this title, visit DCCeBooks.com for more great reads.

What people are saying about …
THE SACRED SEARCH
“Singles, pay attention. Gary knows marriage and is eager
to help those of us desiring marriage get there with
confidence and grace.”
Lisa Anderson, Focus on the Family director
of young adults and host of The Boundless
Show, www.boundless.org
“It’s what drives so many industries and even more
individuals: it’s the pursuit of the perfect spouse. But what
if there’s more—much more—to dating than finding ‘the
one’? In The Sacred Search, my friend Gary Thomas looks
at the heart of a subject that many consider him an expert
on—successful marriage. And with a biblical and bold
approach, he shows readers that marriage isn’t just about
who we walk down the aisle with, but also about the very
reasons behind that walk. Anyone who is dating, engaged,
or hopes to be one day needs to read this book!”
Ed Young, senior pastor of Fellowship
Church, author of the New York Times best-

seller Sexperiment
“Gary Thomas has logged a lot of miles working with
young men and women as they navigate the often difficult
path to marriage in the twenty-first century. The Sacred
Search will help those who desire marriage to pursue it in
a manner that deepens their faith, honors God, and
blesses their future spouse.”
Jim Daly, president of Focus on the Family
“Gary Thomas debunks the mythical search for a soul
mate to help you choose a ‘sole mate’—someone who will
‘lay down their life’ in faithful love. This biblically based
book is for anyone who wants to be wise in their pursuit of
a spouse.”
Drs. Les and Leslie Parrott, authors of
Saving Your Marriage Before It Starts
“You may know Sacred Marriage. The Sacred Search will
ask you why you want to be married. Filled with questions
to make you think and teaching that will bring ‘aha’
moments, this book is a must-read for everyone
considering marriage. I highly recommend it to you—I
wish I’d had it when I was single!”

Linda Dillow, author of best-selling Calm My
Anxious Heart and What’s It Like to Be
Married to Me?
“The Sacred Search is a powerfully honest portrayal of the
biblical view of marriage. Gary Thomas dismantles
contemporary philosophies on love, sexuality, and marital
union by offering strong arguments for why they have not
been successful. His comprehensive look at romantic
relationships through psychological, emotional, physical,
and spiritual perspectives gives the reader a framework
for understanding the why of marriage in a world that is
grossly fixated on the who. His appeal to a kingdom-first
perspective gives both hope and healing for a generation
in desperate need of a fresh and Christ-centered
understanding of God’s plan for marriage. This book is a
must-read before anyone says ‘I do.’”
Michelle Anthony, Family Ministry Architect
for David C Cook and author of Spiritual
Parenting and Dreaming of More for the Next
Generation
“Our culture is obsessed with compatibility and chemistry.

However, in relationship formation, character always
trumps chemistry. Great marriages do not flow from
compatibility; they flow from character. I appreciate Gary
Thomas taking such a bold stand on marriage. The Sacred
Search is a gut check for anyone considering, delaying, or
even pursuing marriage. If marriage scares you, read this
book and be encouraged. If you feel you are not ready for
marriage, then please read and be prepared. If the critics
tell you it ain’t worth it, I beg you to read this book and
learn how to honor marriage.”
Ted Cunningham, author of Young and in
Love and Trophy Child
“One of the primary hopes I have for my generation is that
we will desire partnerships with purpose. In this book,
Gary creates a compelling argument that shifts the
believer’s view of relationships, dating, and marriage to
focus on something greater. His biblical, logical, and
fatherly wise advice is the reason I will point my
generation to his book for many of the commonly asked
‘What about …’ questions. And I will point the older
generation to him as a guide to mentoring my peers. I’m
thankful Gary has created this resource. Guess I can quit

my job now!”
Joy Eggerichs, director of Love and Respect
(Now)
“Something is broken. Marriages are falling apart all
around us, and I believe Gary Thomas has just gone
straight to the root. We build our entire lives on this earth
around this one decision (who to marry): where we live,
how we live. Even future humans hang in the balance.
Gary just built a map to help you see through the emotion
and infatuation to God’s heart for dating and marriage.”
Jennie Allen, author of Anything
“In The Sacred Search, Gary Thomas clearly, relevantly,
and scripturally debunks common myths that stunt singles.
He helps us see the fallacy of searching for our ‘soul mate’
and waiting around for ‘the one.’ This book will help
singles make wiser choices about who we marry because
it explores why we marry.”
Lindsey Nobles, blogger,
www.lindseynobles.com
“‘Why should I get married?’ could be the most important
question millennials are asking. Gary Thomas helps this

generation navigate the ‘why’ in a Christ-honoring way. A
long-awaited tool for how singles can navigate the difficult
waters of dating and how to make finding a mate a holy
pursuit.”
Esther Fleece, culture communicator,
millennial expert, and former millennial
relations assistant at Focus on the Family


--- End of content from file: Gary Thomas - The Sacred Search_ What If It’s Not about Who You Marry, But Why_-David C. Cook (2013).pdf ---
